
PHILIPPINE NATIONAL POLICE MANUAL PNPM-DO-D-0-2-13-21









          REVISED PHILIPPINE NATIONAL POLICE OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES









September 2021





           REVISED PHILIPPINE NATIONAL POLICE
OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES (2021)












Directorate for Operations Camp BGen Rafael T Crame Quezon City, Philippines 2021




COPYRIGHT PAGE


PHILIPPINE NATIONAL POLICE HANDBOOK (PNPM-DO-DS-3-2-21)


REVISED PHILIPPINE NATIONAL POLICE OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES
Copyright 2010


Revised 2021


Printed by Directorate for Operations


The Directorate for Operations


All rights reserved. This publication may not be reproduced, in whole or in part, in any form or by means electronic or mechanical or by any information storage and retrieval system now known or hereafter invented, without prior written permission of the Director, PNP Directorate for Operations with postal address at 3rd Floor, NHQ Building, Camp Crame, Quezon City and telephone numbers (632) 8725-
3178 local 6055 or 0998-9674-892.




PUBLISHER'S NOTE

Gender and Development. - This Police Operational Procedures (POP) Manual strictly adheres to the use of gender-fair language and terms to promote gender and development and non-discriminatory language.


Repealing Clause. - The 2013 POP Manual is hereby repealed. All other PNP issuances, rules and regulations or portions thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this manual are hereby repealed and/or modified accordingly.


Separability Clause. - If for any reason any section or provision of this Manual, or any portion thereof, or the application of such section, provision or portion thereof to any person, group or circumstance is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the remainder of this Manual shall not be affected by such declaration and shall remain in force and effect.


Effectivity. - This POP Manual shall take effect fifteen days upon its
publication at the UP Law Center (E.O No 292).



Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
DILG-NAPOLCOM Center, EDSA cor. Quezon Avenue, West Triangle, Quezon City www.dilg.gov.ph

MESSAGE

Felicitations to the Philippine National Police for publishing the Revised PNP Police Operational Procedure Series of 2021.

Expounding the institution's general principles and operational guidelines in police operations, this manual shall serve as guide to the entire police force in the efficient, orderly, and lawful conduct of their sworn duty to serve and protect the people. The revisited and reviewed guidelines, policies, and other applicable laws will, without a doubt, better equip our men and women with the capabilities and character needed in this rapidly-evolving era.

As our needs have become more extensive and diverse, the police force must be well-equipped and prepared to take on wide-ranging roles and meet the demands of our time. With the COVID-19 pandemic continuing its devastative pursuits, our force needs a more comprehensive and responsive guide that will allow them nourish their drive to a safe, peaceful, and progressive country.

I commend the PNP Directorate for Operations, the Technical Working Group, the editorial board and all those who contributed to this project for their tireless efforts to ensure the accomplishment of this manual.

It is my fervent hope that this printed endeavor serves as our police officers 'bible" on proper, legal, and effective police operations. May it further direct the institution to the rightful path of effectively enforcing the laws and ultimately better the people's trust and regard for the entire force.

Again, congratulations to the Philippine National Police.

Mabuhay!


Republic of the Philippines National Police Commission
NATIONAL HEADQUARTERS PHILIPPINE NATIONAL POLICE
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF, PNP
Camp BGen Rafael T Crame, Quezon City

FOREWORD

A year ago, since the country experienced a surge in local COVID-19 infections, I witnessed how the organization managed to adapt, transcend, and embrace the challenges of the "new normal" at work. Despite the unprecedented public health emergency, the Philippine National Police (PNP) has remained to be a pandemic-resilient police force in the pursuit of our mandate to serve and protect the public.

Establishing	and	implementing	sound	policing	and procedure is a continuing challenge for the organization
especially for our police officers who take full responsibility to keenly observe all operational guidelines while building trust and confidence in the communities.

To cope with the new normal and to keep pace with modern trends in police science, we found it necessary to review, assess, and revise the existing PNP Manual on Police Operational Procedures to ensure that the PNP is applying appropriate improvement, modification, and innovation to policies that are suitable to environment and shifting challenges in law enforcement and criminal justice.

While Intensified Cleanliness Policy (ICP), our current PNP flagship program is on track reaping its gains through various accomplishments and projects, the organization will continue to institutionalize its mechanisms in adherence to the tenets of high sense of commitment, dedication and professionalism.

I would like to commend the Directorate for Operations, members of the Technical Working Group and all the people who dedicatedly contributed in making the revision of the PNP Manual on Police Operational Procedures possible.


GUILLERMO LORENZO T ELEAZAR
Police General Chief, PNP


Republic of the Philippines National Police Commission
NATIONAL HEADQUARTERS PHILIPPINE NATIONAL POLICE
DIRECTORATE FOR OPERATIONS
Camp BGen Rafael T Crame, Quezon City

PREFACE
In line with the PNP's constitutional mandate, to serve and protect, it is imperative that we keep our policies and procedures up-to-date. As various threat groups and criminal gangs evolved from their traditional to modern scheme, it is vital for the police force to always be at least two steps ahead of them.

We constantly review and evaluate our existing processes and make necessary amendments by introducing new strategies and innovating approaches in order to sustain and enhance our law enforcement capabilities commensurate to the current demands of the expansive global community.

Hence, we enjoined the participation of subject matter experts such as judges, prosecutors, DILG, NAPOLCOM, and Commission on Human Rights officials, PNP lawyers and operations managers who are at the forefront, in coming up with an amplified and improved PNP Manual on Police Operational Procedures.

Cognizant of the fact that the challenges brought about by the pandemic, we also attuned our policies to respond to the realities of the new normal and the future normal.

Among the essential new features of the revised manual are the procedures in the Use of the Body-Worn Camera System, Major Event Security Framework, Use of Force Policy (Force Continuum) as well as additions from recent legislations.

I commend the DO Family and the members of the Technical Working Group for another great milestone in the PNP history. This endeavor will stand proof to the never-ending pursuit and collective aspiration of providing a safe and secured community.




Police Major General


Republic of the Philippines
KAGAWARAN NG KATARUNGAN
Department of Justice
Manila


MESSAGE

Peace, order and security are vital to the growth and prosperity of our communities. They guarantee our people's fundamental freedom from fear and allow them to collectively aspire for and move towards a future free from poverty and want.

Securing peace and promoting social order are a responsibility shared by many institutions both within and outside government. It is, however, a responsibility that falls most heavily on the shoulders of the men and women of the Philippine National Police (PNP).

The PNP is our civilian police force mandated by law to, among others, promote peace and order and ensure public safety. Its presence and visibility thwart threats to the security and peace of our communities. Its investigative work is indispensable in the robust functioning of our criminal justice system. It is mostly through police work that our prosecutors obtain the evidence necessary to prosecute and convict those who transgress our laws. These, among others, become the basis for the dispensation of criminal justice, and the deterrence of further criminality in our streets.

The important role assumed by our police force, and the substantial impact of its actions on our citizens' and nation's life, necessitate the standardization of procedures to achieve not only operational efficiency, but more importantly transparency and accountability. Standardized operational procedures promote strict adherence to the Constitutional and legal guarantees which every police officer has sworn to protect and uphold . They are the strongest reminders to our law enforcers that the ends of peace, order and security can only be attained through lawful and ethical mea ns. Any other means is antithetical to, and subverts, the ends of law enforcement

It is in this context that we strongly welcome the revision and publication of the updated Police Operational Procedures. The revision, spearheaded by the




Directorate for Operations, combines the pragmatic considerations on the ground where the threats to peace and security are experienced, and the noble guarantees and principles founded on the rule of law and demanded by justice and equity. It seeks to incorporate technological advances in the field of police operations and security, the ideals of human rights, and major developments during the past decade in the field of security and law enforcement.

The strict implementation of these revised Police Operational Procedures should further strengthen our people's confidence not only in the professionalization of our police force, but also in our government's capacity and unwavering commitment to secure for each person a peaceful, orderly, and progressive society that respects and promotes our most cherished liberties and freedoms.







SECRETARY




Republic of the Philippines NATIONAL POLICE COMMISSION DILG-NAPOLCOM Center
NAPOLCOM Bldg.,EDSA cor Quezon Ave West Triangle,Quezon City 1104
www.napolcom.gov.ph


MESSAGE


My warmest congratulations to the Phiippine National Police (PNP),especially the Directorate for Operations, the members of the Technical Working Group and all the men and women of the PNP who worked behind to successfully come up with the updated Police Operational Procedures (POP) Manual of the PNP.

It was eight (8) years ago when a team of legal and police experts who gained years of experience of actual police operations on the ground crafted the POP. It has since become the bible of the police which provided its members of the how-to's in the conduct of its various police operations.
However, the emerging issues in law enforcement and
criminal justice necessitate the revision of the POP to make it more responsive to the new threats to law and order and to the growing security demand, as well as, to incorporate newly released or promulgated laws, rules and issuances. Thus, this edition.

Among the focal features of the newly revised POP are the adoption of strategies maximizing the use technological advances in the field of law enforcement; the use of force continuum; procedures in police community relations;major event security management;and health hazard response. It is also noteworthy that the human rights principles and rights based approaches were meticulously taken into consideration while crafting the manual and ensure its adherence to human rights.

Uniformed members of the PNP are expected to be superior in agility, aptitude, and discipline. With the POP serving as the bible of all police personnel to better perform their sworn duties and responsibilities while being mindful of the prescriptions and proscriptions provided by law, the PNP is assured of police officers at the cutting edge of performance and professionalism.

Rest assured that for the NAPOLCOM, we have already put in place, and will continually develop, the necessary policies to strengthen and reinforce the POP.




Together with the whole NAPOLCOM family and under the very able leadership of DILG Secretary and NAPOLCOM Chairman Eduardo M. Ano, we are one with you in the advancement of policies and programs which will guide the PNP in its goal of becoming highly professionalized, dedicated, and committed public servants.

Congratulations and more power!






VITALIANO N. AGUIRRE III
Commissioner
Vice Chairman and Executive Officer


Republic of the Philippines
COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS
Commonwealth Avenue, U.P. Complex, Diliman 1101 Quezon City Tel. Nos. (02) 8294 8704 (02) 8925 3886


MESSAGE

The rules of the game matter.

As Chairperson of the 5th Commission on Human Rights (2015-2022), I am pleased to welcome the publication of the Revised Philippine National Police Operational Procedures (2021).

Article 3 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights states that, "everyone has the right to life, liberty, and security of person".

Guided by the motto "to serve and protect", the PNP is
the primary institution responsible for the maintenance of
public order and the rule of law. However, the rise in number of human rights investigations in recent years indicate that greater emphasis must be placed on the link between human rights and the rule of law. When individuals sit idly by, while injustices are being committed, are we not perpetuating a culture of impunity? The path of violence is made up of the unreckoned consequences of banal, incidental brutality and impunity seeping into the political landscape.

Designed to underscore the importance of accountability, it is only fitting that the Revised Manual is informed by international human rights legal framework, best practices, and lessons learned on the full gamut of key law enforcement operations. A notable example is the provision of clear guidelines for the use of body-worn cameras (BWC) by police officers in all of their operations, including procedures for the submission and storage of all such recordings, in accordance with the Honorable Supreme Court's A.M. No. 21-06-08-SC. This innovation, when properly implemented, will go a long way towards promoting accountability among the ranks of the police and can serve as an effective deterrent to any untoward actions in the course of police operations. After all, human rights standards were initially developed as a means of protecting the individual against State abuse of power.




While this Manual is an important tool in ensuring the respect for human rights, it is but only one aspect. Nevertheless, it is an invaluable guide in understanding that positions of trust-authority--come with a duty to act in the public interest. This Manual seeks to remind that a true and bona fide member of the PNP does nothing less but to serve and protect.

It is my hope that this Manual will be a useful resource in our collective efforts to
protect and promote the human rights and dignity of all. Padayon!



JOSE LUIS MARTIN C. GASCON
Chairperson




ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

      After eight years, the PNP Operational Procedures (POP) Manual was revised to keep it relevant with the new legislations and emerging issues and concerns in law enforcement and criminal justice. This POP was crafted by well- rounded experts who have years of experience in actual police operations on the ground, complemented by legal experts of the PNP, and reviewed by the DILG, NAPOLCOM, CHR, and invited judges and prosecutors.

      Let me recognize the collaborative effort of the members of the Technical Working Group spearheaded by the Chairman, PBGEN RONNIE FRANCIS M CARIAGA; PCOL REYNALDO H PAWID, Chief, Law Enforcement Division (LED); PLTCOL DARWIN CLARK PAZ, Servicing Legal Officer; and PMAJ KARISSMA G STA JUANA, Chief, Special Concerns Section, LED/POP Focal Person, who painstakingly ensured that each chapter and provision are aptly put in context.

      Likewise, allow me to express my gratitude to PBGEN FRANCO P SIMBORIO, Deputy Director for Operations; PBGEN BENJAMIN D SANTOS, JR., Chief, PNP Command Center, other Division Chiefs, men and women of the Directorate for Operations, and the Chiefs of the different Regional Operations Division and Operations Management Division who generously imparted their knowledge, expertise and significant insights, making the Revised POP Manual much comprehensive yet vivid and realistic.

      I, therefore, look forward to a revitalized and more objective, organized, and deliberate police operations. I oblige each and every member of the PNP organization to study this book from cover to cover so that everyone will know the basics and fundamentals of police operations by heart.


Police Major General
The Director for Operations






 POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE PHILIPPINE NATIONAL POLICE (PNP)
REPUBLIC ACT 6975 "Department of the Interior and Local
Government Act of 1990"

SEC. 24. POWERS AND FUNCTIONS. - THE PNP SHALL HAVE THE FOLLOWING POWERS AND FUNCTIONS:

(a) Enforce all laws and ordinances relative to the protection of lives and
properties;

(b) Maintain peace and order and take all necessary steps to ensure public
safety;

(c) Investigate and prevent crimes, effect the arrest of criminal offenders, bring offenders to justice and assist in their prosecution;

(d) Exercise the general powers to make arrest, search and seizure in
accordance with the Constitution and pertinent laws;

(e) Detain an arrested person for a period not beyond what is prescribed by law, informing the person so detained of all his/her rights under the Constitution;

(f) Issue licenses for the possession of firearms and explosives in accordance with law;

(g) Supervise and control the training and operations of security agencies and issue licenses to operate security agencies, and to security guards and private detectives, for the practice of their professions; and

(h) Perform such other duties and exercise all other functions as may be provided by law




TABLE OF CONTENTS


GENERAL PRINCIPLES-1Strategic Guidelines-1CHAPTER 1 GENERAL GUIDELINES-2Section 1-1 Police Uniform and Accessories-21.1	Agency Prescribed Uniform-21.2	Appearing Before the Public-21.3	Carrying of Basic Police Equipment-2Section 1-2 Categories of Police Operations-21.4	Patrol Operations-21.5	Law Enforcement Operations-21.6	Internal Security Operations-31.7	Public Safety Operations-31.8	Special Police Operations-31.9	Investigation Operations-31.10 Police Community Relations-3CHAPTER 2 OPERATIONAL GUIDELINES-4Section 2-1 Pre-Operational Clearance-4Section 2-2 Coordination-42.1	Inter-Office Coordination-42.2	Coordination by Filing Coordination Form-42.3Coordination by Practical/Available Means of	-Communication5



Section 2-3 Requirements of Police Operations	-	5


2.4	Basic Requirements-52.5	Use of Megaphones and Similar Instruments/devices-52.6	Accessories-52.7	Use of Body Worn Camera-6
Section 2-4 Use of Force Policy	-	7
2.8 Application of Necessary and Reasonable Force	-	7
2.9 The Force Continuum	-	8

2.10 Responsibility of the Police Officer in Charge of the
Operations

-	12


Section 2-5 Use of Firearm During Police Operations	-	13


2.11 Use of Firearm When Justified-132.12 Firing at Moving Vehicles is prohibited-132.13 Filing of an Incident Report After the Use of Firearm-132.14 Procedures After an Armed Confrontation-14
CHAPTER 3 POLICE OPERATIONS	-	15

RULE 1 PATROL OPERATIONS	-	15


1.1	Patrol Guidelines-151.2	Patrol Duties-16a. Patrol Supervisors-16b. Patrol Officers-17
c. Guidelines and Procedures when Responding to Calls for Police Assistance

-	18





RULE 2 LAW ENFORCEMENT OPERATIONS-202.1	Stopping and Frisking (Pat-Down Search)-20a.	When to Stop and Frisk (Pat-Down Search)-201)	Stopping-202)	Body Frisking (Pat-Down Search)-20b.	Procedures and Guidelines-211)	Stopping-212)	Body Frisking (Pat-Down Search)-21c.	Reporting After Stopping or Body Frisking-222.2	Checkpoints-22a.	Authority to Establish Checkpoints-22b.	Composition-23c.	Guidelines-23d.	Procedures in the Conduct of PNP Checkpoint-26e. Procedures in the Conduct of On-the-Spot (Hasty) Checkpoints
e. in the Conduct of Joint Checkpoints
1)	Commission	on	Elections	(COMELEC) Checkpoints
2)	Inter-Agency	Checkpoints	(DENR,	DA, BFAR, etc)
3)	Joint PNP-AFP Checkpoints
f. Procedures to be Followed When Checkpoint is Ignored

2.3	Flagging Down Vehicles	-	30 sible Involvement in the Commission of a Crime.	-	30





b. Procedures in Flagging Down Vehicles for Viola-
tion of Traffic Laws, Rules and Regulations
c. Procedures in Flagging Down Motorists Who are Under the Influence of Alcohol, and/or Danger- ous Drugs and Similar Substances

-	33

-	33


























Arrest






f. Physical/Medical	Examination	of	Arrested Person/Suspect

-	50

g. Booking of Arrested Suspect	-	50


2.7	Search and Seizure-55a.	Requisites for the Issuance of Search Warrant-55b.	Validity of Search Warrant-56c.	Time of Search-56



d. Applications for Search Warrant	-	57

e. Authority of Police Officers when Conducting
Search

-	57

f. Use of BWC During the Search	-	58
g. Notification During the Search	-	58

h. Prohibited Acts in the Conduct of Search by Virtue of a Search Warrant

-	58

i. Inventory and Delivery of Property Seized	-	58
j. Downloading of Data from the BWC/ARD:	-	59

k. Affidavit of Search and Submission of Recordings
to Court
l. Valid Search and Seizures Without Search Warrant

-	60
-	62



2.8	Rules on Anti-Illegal Drugs Operations-63a.	General Policy and Guidelines:-63b.	Coordination Requirements-64
c. Handling, Custody and Disposition of Drug and Non-Drug Evidence

-	65



2.9	Rules on Anti-Kidnapping Operations-70a.	Types of Kidnapping-70b.	Concept of Operation-71
1) Kidnapping by Organized Crime Group/ Criminal Group

-	71

2) Kidnapping by Terrorists Groups	-	71
3) Kidnapping by Other Individuals	-	72


2.10 Cybercrime and Cyber-Related Incident Response Operations

-	73

a. Cybercrime Response	-	73

b. Guidelines in Responding to Cybercrime and Cyber-Related Incidents

-	73

c. Preservation of Seized Computer	-	74




d. Guidelines in the Treatment of Other Electronic Data Storage Devices
e. Preservation of Seized Mobile Communication Devices
f. Preservation of Seized Facsimile or Fax Machine or Similar Devices
g. Preservation of Seized Caller ID Devices and Other Similar Devices
h. Guidelines in the Treatment of Seized Digital Video Recording (DVR) Devices
i. Acquiring the DVR Devices and/or their Footages/ Recording

RULE 3 INTERNAL SECURITY OPERATIONS	-	77

3.1	The PNP in an Active Support Role	-	78

3.2	Law	Enforcement	Operations	Against	Terrorist Groups and other Threats to National Security

-	78

3.3	Target Hardening	-	78

RULE 4 PUBLIC SAFETY OPERATIONS	-	80


4.1 PNP	Critical	Incident	Management	Operational Procedures (CIMOP)

-	80



a.	Types of Critical Incidents-801)	Natural Calamity and Disaster-812)	Human Induced Incident-81b.	Stages in Disaster Management-811)	Pre- Disaster Stage-812)	Disaster Response Stage-82a)	Natural Calamity-82b)	Human Induced Incident-833)	Post-Disaster Stage-83




c. Alert Levels During Human-Induced Critical Incident

-	84

d. Incident Command System (ICS)	-	84

e. Organization and Structure of CIMC/CIMTG/ DIMTG

-	85

f. The Escalation Protocols	-	89


4.2	Hostage Situation-91a.	First Responders-91b.	Incident Commander (IC)-92c.	Hostage Negotiation Team-94d.	Assault Team-95e.	Crowd Control-95f.	Support Personnel-95
g. After the neutralization of the hostage-taker/s and rescue of the hostage/s, the following processing and debriefing procedures shall be under taken:

4.3 Bomb Threat and Bomb Incident Emergency Response
a. Procedures for FR Upon Receipt of Any Bomb Threat
b. Procedures for FR if a suspected item is found and the EOD/K9 recommended an evacuation from the affected area
c. Procedures for FR if the EOD/K9 confirmed the presence of an explosive component or Impro- vised Explosive Device (IED)

-	95

-	96
-	96

-	96

-	97

d. Procedures for FR in Case of Bomb Explosion	-	97


4.4	Civil Disturbance Management (CDM) Operations-98a.	General Guidelines-98b.	Specific Guidelines-99

















-	103










f.	Guidelines in dealing with Assemblies, Rallies, Demonstrations and Marches


-	107



4.6 Procedures for Responding PNP Personnel in Enforcing Quarantine Measures to Manage Health Hazards
a. Initial Response Upon the Impact of Health Hazard
b. When the Health Hazard Becomes Widespread
and has Affected Many Communities
c. Other Activities Relative to Public Safety and Security
d. Arrest of Violators in Relation to Health Hazard Laws, Guidelines and Protocols

RULE 5 SPECIAL POLICE OPERATIONS

-	108



5.1	Major Events Security Management-111a.	Classification of Major Events-111



b. Creation of Joint Security Task Forces (STF)
c. Procedures in the Establishment and Operationalization of Multi-Agency Coordinating Center
d. Procedures to be undertaken by the Commander,
TG Security
e. Procedures to be undertaken by the Commander,
TG peace and order
f. Procedures to be Undertaken by the Commander, TG Emergency Preparedness and Response

5.2 Assistance During the Implementation of Or- ders or Decisions from Courts, Quasi-Judicial or Ad- ministrative Bodies
a. g Labor Disputes
1) Policy and Guidelines
2) Legal Parameters
3) of Lawful Orders or Writ
4) Labor Activities
5) During	Pickets	and	Lock

b. g Enforcement of Demolition and Ejectment

1) Role of the PNP in the Enforcement of a Demolition and/or Ejectment Order
2) Procedures in the Enforcement of a Demolition and/or Ejectment Order
c. g Implementation of Final Decisions or Orders of the Courts in Civil Cases, of Quasi-judicial Bodies and of Administrative Bodies within their Jurisdiction
1) Assistance in the Implementation of Final Decisions or Orders or Resolutions of the Courts in Civil Cases, of Quasi-Judicial Bodies and of Administrative Bodies, (Except Cases with Issued Temporary Restraining Order or Injunction)





2)	Requirements for Police Assistance-1253)	Period to Render Police Assistance-126
4)	Office or Unit That May Be Tasked to
Render Police Assistance

-	126

5)	Extent of Police Assistance	-	126

6) Role of PNP Personnel Rendering Police Assistance
d. g the Implementation of Final Decisions or Orders or Resolutions of the COMELEC or DILG or Local Government Unit Exercising Disciplinary Powers in Administrative Cases of Elected Officials

-	127

-	127


1)	Requirements for the Request for Police Assistance-1272)	Period to Render Police Assistance-1273)	Extent of Police Assistance-128
4) Role of PNP Personnel Rendering Police Assistance
e. g the Implementation of Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program (CARP)

-	128
-	128

1) e of Police Assistance	-	128

2) s in the Granting of Police Assistance

-	129

3) of Police Assistance	-	129

4) e of PNP Personnel Rendering Police Assistance
5) Entry to the Property is Refused by the Landowner
f. g the Implementation of Decisions/Orders of the Court, Quasi-judicial or Administrative Bodies that are Immediately Executory

-	130
-	130

-	130


RULE 6. INVESTIGATION OPERATIONS	-	132

6.1 Conduct of Crime Scene Investigation	-	132

a. Specific	Functions,	Responsibilities	and
Procedures

-	132





1)	First Responders-1322)	Investigator-On-Case (IOC)-1333)	SOCO-1344)	Legal Officer-134b.	Special SOCO Procedures-135
c. Policy Guidelines on Processing of Persons Present at the Crime Scene during Post-Incident Situations

-	135

1) Processing, Debriefing and Documentation:	-	136

2) Venue	of	Processing,	Debriefing	and
Documentation

-	136


d.	Release of the Crime Scene-1366.2	Maintenance of Police Blotter-137a.	Police Blotter-137b.	Blotter Procedure-1376.3	Judicial Affidavit Rule-137a.	Application of Rule to Criminal Actions-138b.	Contents of Judicial Affidavit-138c.	Sworn Attestation of the Lawyer-1396.4	Custodial Investigation-139a.	Duties of the Police during Custodial Investigation-139b.	Persons Under Police Custody (PUPC)-1411)	Admission-1412)	Requirements for Admission-1423)	Segregation of PUPC-142




4)	Visitation-1425)	Transfer of Custody-1436)	Release-143c.	Transporting of PUPC-144
6.5 Instituting Criminal Actions	-	144
a. Inquest Procedures	-	144
b. Waiver of Rights	-	145
c. Preliminary Investigation and Direct Filing	-	146
d. Attendance to Court Duties	-	146
e. Monitoring of Cases by the Investigators	-	147


6.6 Investigation by the Local Police Unit After an Armed Confrontation

-	147


a.	Responsibility of the Local Police Unit-147b.	Processing of the Crime Scene-147
c. Disposition of Firearms, Cartridges and Bullets Used, Seized, or Recovered in the absence of SOCO Team
d. Disposition of Other Evidence Used, Seized or Recovered

-	147

-	148

e. Procedures to be Followed in Case Persons Died	-	148

6.7 Procedures in the Investigation of Heinous and


6.8 Investigation of Violence Against Women and Children (VAW/C) and other Gender-Based Violence (GBV)
a. Investigation of Complaints and Reports Involving All Forms of VAW/C and other GBV
b. Rescue,	Temporary	Shelter	and	Protective Custody of Child Victim-Survivor
c. Procedure in the Rescue of a Child





d. Procedure to be Observed in the Handling of Children at Risk (CAR), Children in Conflict with the Law (CICL) and Children Involved in Armed Conflict (CIAC)


-	152



RULE 7. POLICE COMMUNITY RELATIONS (PCR)-1537.1	Essence of PCR-1537.2	General Guidelines-1537.3	Public Information-154a.	Protocols in Releasing Information-154b.	Media Relations Protocols-155c.	Media Relations During Crisis-155d.	Social Media Protocols-1567.4	Information Development Operations (IDO)-156a.	Three Classifications of IDO-156b.	Strategic Communication-1577.5	Police Community Affairs and Development-157
a. PCAD programs and activities shall be guided by the following
b. Community	Engagement	and	Awareness Procedures

-	158
-	158


c.	Community Organizing Procedures-159d.	Community Mobilization Procedures-159
7.6	Gender and Development (GAD)
-
160a.	The Role of Police Officers as Advocates of GAD-1601)Deployment	of	Female	Police	During Operations-160




2) Deployment	Of	WCPD	Officers	in

3) Decent Custodial Facilities for Both Male

4) Promotion	of	Gender	Equality	and



7.7	Salaam Police-161a.	Islamic Cultural and Religious Sensitivities-162b.	Engagement with Muslim Communities:-162
SUMMARY OF CHANGES-
164LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS-166LIST OF TABLES-172GLOSSARY OF TERMS-173LIST OF ANNEXES-198ANNEXES-200BIBLIOGRAPHY-287TECHNICAL WORKING GROUP-290PROMULGATION-293BOARD RESOLUTION-295



GENERAL PRINCIPLES STRATEGIC GUIDELINES
      Regardless of the type of function to be performed and/or police operations to be conducted, all PNP personnel must know by heart and shall comply with and apply the following principles and procedures:


To Serve and Protect


The responsibility of every police officer is to serve the public and protect
life and property.



To Respect Human Rights and Dignity of Person


      All PNP personnel shall respect and uphold the human rights and dignity of all persons at all times.




      CHAPTER 1 GENERAL GUIDELINES
Section 1-1 Police Uniform and Accessories


1.1 Agency Prescribed Uniform. A police officer shall always wear the prescribed uniform for the kind of police operation to be undertaken (Annex "A").

1.2 Appearing Before the Public. When wearing the police uniform, a police officer shall, at all times, appear to look presentable, respectable, smart, and well- groomed. A police officer shall refrain from doing unnecessary activities and/or actions while on duty.

1.3 Carrying of Basic Police Equipment. Every police officer on patrol, whether on board a vehicle or on foot patrol, shall always carry with him/her his/ her issued firearm, and other equipment such as but not limited to restraint device, impact device and personal protective equipment. He/she shall also use other accessories required for the specific police operation being conducted.



Section 1-2 Categories of Police Operations


1.4 Patrol Operations. The most basic police function and known as the backbone of policing.

1.5 Law Enforcement Operations. Include service of warrant of arrest, implementation of search warrant, enforcement of visitorial powers of the Chiefs of Police, and other anti-criminality operations.

1.6 Internal Security Operations. Include counterterrorism operations and




similar operations against other threat groups that are conducted to ensure internal security.

1.7 Public Safety Operations. Include critical incident management procedures, search, rescue and retrieval operations, hostage situation, civil disturbance management operation, management of health hazards and other operations that promote public safety.

1.8 Special Police Operations. Include high-risk checkpoint and roadblock operation, police assistance in the implementation of order from the court and other quasi-judicial bodies, security to major and special events, aircraft hijacking operations, visit, board, search and seizure of marine vessels, and similar police operations that are conducted by police units with specialized training on the peculiarity of the mission or purpose.

1.9 Investigation Operations. Include investigation of crime or incident, Scene of the Crime Operations (SOCO), administrative investigation and other investigative work necessary to determine facts and circumstances for filing cases criminally or administratively.

1.10 Police Community Relations. Include three interrelated dimensions to accomplish its mission namely: community affairs and development, public information, and information development operations to forge partnership and strengthen collaboration and linkages with the community.




        CHAPTER 2 OPERATIONAL GUIDELINES
      All PNP personnel shall respect and uphold the human rights and dignity of all persons at all times.


Section 2-1 Pre-Operational Clearance


      In all planned police operations, the team leader of the operating team/s shall secure a Pre-Operation Clearance prior to the conduct of operation. This clearance must be approved by their Chief/Commander/Head of Office/Unit and must be submitted at the Operations Section/Division of the concerned operating police units for record purposes.



Section 2-2 Coordination


2.1  Inter-Office Coordination. The operations officer or Team Leader/s (TL) of Local Police Units (LPUs) operating outside their territorial jurisdiction and National Support units (NSUs) shall, whenever practicable, coordinate personally at any levels of police offices (Police Regional Office (PRO) to Municipal Police Station (MPS)) or other friendly units within whose jurisdiction the operation is to be conducted.

2.2  Coordination by Filing Coordination Form. Prior to the launching of the operation except in cases where the formal (in writing) inter-unit coordination cannot be made due to the nature and/or urgency of the situation such as, but not limited to, cross-jurisdiction pursuit operations, coordination should be made formally using the prescribed Coordination Form, which shall be filed with the




concerned operation center of the Police Regional, Provincial or City Police Office and Police Stations (Annex "B").

2.3  Coordination by Practical/Available Means of Communication. In cases where formal inter-unit coordination is not feasible, the Police Unit concerned shall endeavor to notify the Local Police Unit (LPU) through any practical/available means of communication including but not limited to electronic or signal communication at any time before the operation and shall accomplish and furnish the LPU a written incident report immediately after the termination of the operation.



Section 2-3 Requirements of Police Operations


2.4 Basic Requirements. Police operations such as but not limited to arrest, search and seizure, checkpoint, roadblocks, and civil disturbance management shall, whenever applicable and practicable, be conducted as follows:

a.	With marked police vehicle;

b. Led by a Police Commissioned Officer (PCO) or the most senior Police Non-Commissioned Officer (PNCO) in the absence or unavailability of a PCO; and

c.  With personnel in prescribed police uniform except for covert operatives when serving warrant of arrest provided personnel in uniform shall be present during the arrest

d. With the use of Body Worn Cameras (BWCs) and/or Alternative Recording Devices (ARDs) during the conduct of searches and arrests.

2.5 Use of Megaphones and Similar Instruments/devices. During actual police intervention operations, the Team Leader shall use peaceful means including the use of megaphones or any other similar instruments/devices to warn or influence the offender/s or suspect/s to stop and/or peacefully surrender.

2.6  Accessories. A police officer may carry or use accessories appropriate to the police operation being performed. Accessories may include, ballistic vest, handheld radio, first aid kit, flashlight, hand cuff, whistle and non-lethal equipment




including but not limited to baton, truncheon, and night stick to be used in a non-
armed confrontation with a violent, uncooperative and unruly offender.

2.7	Use of Body Worn Camera

a. Chain of Custody over the Recordings in the Execution of Arrest and Search:

    The chain of custody over the recordings shall at all times be preserved from improper access, review, and tampering. It shall cover the following events:

1)	Recording of the footage using the BWCs/ARDs;

2)  Turnover of the BWCs/ARDs used by the arresting or searching team, or of the data by the media representative to the Data Custodian to which they belong;

3)	Downloading of the data by the Data Custodian;

4)	Redaction of personal identities by the Data Custodian or his/her
representative, whenever applicable;

5)	Retrieval of recording data and their transfer to an external media
storage device by the Data Custodian;

6) Submission and delivery of the recordings contained in an external media storage device to the court.

b. The BWC/ARD shall be used/activated during the conduct of arrest, search and whenever practicable, in cases of warrantless arrests. The rules on the use of BWC under A.M. No. 21-06-08-SC shall be observed.

c.	The BWC/ARD shall not be used/activated in the following circumstances:

1)  In police facilities unless in an official capacity, or as part of an investigation procedure;

2)  Conduct of any personal activity (in any location where individuals have a reasonable expectation of privacy, such as restrooms,




locker rooms, or break rooms). As a reminder, there is potential
criminal and civil liability if this restriction is violated;

3)  Conduct of any personal activity in locations where individuals have reasonable expectation of privacy such as in residences, unless the recording is being made pursuant to a valid arrest or search warrant of the individuals or locations;

4)	During strip or body cavity searches when such is necessary as
provided in the warrant;

5)	Conduct of tactical planning before the planned operation;

6) Intentionally activated to record conversations/communications between PNP personnel without their knowledge during routine, and other non-law enforcement related activities;

7)	Between confidential informants or undercover officers;

8)  Privileged communications between the subject of recordings and other individuals, such as attorneys, members of the clergy, peer support councilors and medical professionals;

9)  While on the grounds of any public, private or parochial elementary or secondary school, hospitals, churches and other places of worship except when responding to an imminent threat to life or health; and

10)  Other circumstances as may be provided by the trial court issuing the warrant which is part of constitutional privilege and where the dignity of an individual may outweigh the public necessity for recording.



Section 2-4 Use of Force Policy


2.8	Application  of  Necessary  and  Reasonable  Force.  In  the  lawful
performance of duty, a police officer shall use necessary and reasonable force to




accomplish his/her mandated task of enforcing the law and maintaining peace and order.

      A police officer, however, is not required to afford the offender/s attacking him/ her the opportunity for a fair or equal struggle. The necessity and reasonableness of the force employed will depend upon the number of aggressors, nature and characteristic of the weapon used, physical condition, size and other circumstances to include the place and occasion of the assault. The police officer is given the sound discretion to consider these factors in employing reasonable force.

      During confrontation with an armed offender, only such necessary and reasonable force shall be applied as would be sufficient to overcome the aggression by the offender; subdue the clear and imminent danger posed by him/her; or to justify the force/act under the principles of self-defense, defense of relative, defense of stranger or fulfillment of duty, in accordance with the elements laid down by law and jurisprudence. The excessive use of force to arrest or immobilize the suspect during police operation is prohibited.

2.9 The Force Continuum. It is a linear-progressive decision-making process which displays the array of police reasonable responses commensurate to the level of suspect/law offender's resistance to effect compliance, arrest and other law enforcement actions (Annex "C").

      It allows police officer responses to be flexible and/or employ reasonable force in either sequential, consecutive or combination of options against the dynamic suspect/s or law offender/s threats or resistances. In all instances, the professional and respectable deportment of police as public safety servants, civil use of language, well-mannered decorum and utmost respect for human rights shall be observed.

a.	Three Approaches on The Use of Force Continuum

1)  Non-Lethal Approach. This involves the police presence in crime-prone areas and the employment of activities or actions to persuade and/or request cooperation of people particularly suspects and law offenders to police instructions and other control efforts.




Table 1.1 Non-Lethal Approach

Officer's PresenceSuspect Threats or Resistance: CooperativePolice Response/Equipment
* Compliant	and	cooperative	with
police control efforts.
* Display professional and respectable deportment.

* Wear the prescribed uniform with the equipment securely attached to the rig or utility belt.Verbal Command    Suspect Threats or Resistance: Non-Verbal and Verbal Non-CompliancePolice Response/ Equipment
* Non-compliant,	uncooperative	or
resist to follow police control efforts.

* Do not present immediate physical resistance or threats of physical injury to the police or to other persons.
* Employ communication techniques, including: request, persuasion, command and/or issuance of warning by voice, print and/or electronic in clear and understandable manner.
* Use of whistle
* Use of language that is known to the
offender or in the national language
* The verbal command shall be done in a
loud, firm and clear manner.
* Use of sign language for speech-
impaired offenders




Physical Control-Soft Hand TechniqueSuspect Threats or Resistance: Passive ResistancePolice Response/Equipment
* Unarmed
* Non-compliant, uncooperative and verbally abusive.

* Attempts to curl into fetal position, pull away, escape or evade.

* Do not present immediate physical resistance or threat of physical injury to the police or other persons.
* Ensure the employment of reasonable force that will cause no harm or minimal chance of injury to the suspect or law offender.
* Includes but not limited to:

o Use of bare hands to guide, escort, hold and/or apply restraining equipment (handcuffs or flex cuffs/ plastic strap).

o Application of body joint manipulation, immobilization and/or touch pressure point stimulation to ensure cooperation, compliance or surrender.Physical Control-Hard Hand TechniqueSuspect Threats or Resistance: Active ResistancePolice Response/Equipment
* Unarmed.
* Non-compliant, uncooperative and verbally abusive.

* When responded with police control efforts, the suspect use physical threats and/or aggression.

* Uses mechanical or other objects to thwart the police control efforts by physically securing or holding to another object.
* As much as possible, the employment of reasonable force will not result to serious injury.

* Employ reasonable physical control and/or pain-compliant techniques, such as: punches, kicks and other striking techniques to ensure cooperation, compliance or surrender.

* May orally summon as many persons as he/she deems necessary to assist him/her in effecting the arrest.



2)  Less Lethal Approach. This involves the employment of less lethal equipment that do not cause serious injury and/or death and that less physical measures have been tried and deemed inappropriate purposely to ensure cooperation, compliance or surrender. The age, gender and health condition of offenders shall be considered before the employment of less lethal equipment.



Table 1.2 Less Lethal Approach




Suspect Threats or Resistance: Assaultive ResistancePolice Response/Equipment
Impact	Weapons	(such	as	Batons, Truncheons and/or Night Stick).
* Unarmed.
* Non-compliant, uncooperative and verbally abusive to the police and other persons.

* Unlawful aggression or attempts (apparent intent) to make physical contact, control or assault.

* Employs or uses bodily force or active aggression (push, throw, strike, tackle or physical harm) that may or may not cause injury to the police officer or other persons/self.
* Exert due diligence in the employment of reasonable force through impact weapons and ensure that it will not cause serious injury or death.

* Target only the fleshy parts of the body such as arms, torso, legs, and thighs.

* As much as possible, avoid hitting the head, neck, face, groin, solar plexus, kidneys and spinal column areas.



3) Lethal Approach. This involves the employment of lethal equipment usually as last resort. Lethal force will only be employed when all other approaches have been exhausted and found to be insufficient to thwart the life-threatening actions or omissions posed by armed suspect or law offender. This approach carries with it the greater responsibility as it may result to severe injury and serious bodily harm and/or death.


Table 1.3 Lethal Approach

Suspect Threat or Resistance: Serious Injury and/or DeathPolice Response/Equipment* Armed and dangerous.
* Unlawful aggression and/or intention to cause severe injury, serious bodily harm and/or death to police officer/s and other people.* The use of conventional weapons, such as hand guns and rifles, are authorized to prevent or repel the unlawful aggression and immobilize the suspect.

* As much as possible, avoid hitting the head or other vital parts of the body.

* Wounded persons/suspects must be given first aid and/or brought to the nearest hospital at the first possible opportunity
b. Guidelines on the De-Escalation of Response. At any time when the suspects or law offenders comply, cooperate or surrender to police control efforts, the police officer must de-escalate to the appropriate level of approach. However, he/she shall remain vigilant on the possibility of escalation of response whenever reasonable and necessary or depending on the prevailing situation.

2.10 Responsibility of the Police Officer in Charge of the Operations. The police officer who is in charge of the operation shall, at all times, observe the Force Continuum and exercise control over all police personnel in the area of operation to protect lives and properties.




Section 2-5 Use of Firearm During Police Operations


2.11 Use of Firearm When Justified. The use of firearm is justified if the offender poses an imminent danger of causing death or injury to the police officer or other persons. The use of firearm is also justified under the doctrines of self-defense, defense of a relative, and defense of a stranger. However, one who resorts to self- defense must face a real threat on his/her life, and the peril sought to be avoided must be actual, imminent and real. Unlawful aggression should be present for self- defense to be considered as a justifying circumstance.

      The police shall not use warning shots during police operation except when the police officer is outnumbered and overpowered, and his/her life and limb is in imminent danger.

2.12 Firing at Moving Vehicles is prohibited. A moving vehicle and its occupants shall not be fired upon except when its occupants pose imminent danger of causing death or injury to the police officer or any other person, and that the use of firearm does not create any danger to the public and outweighs the likely benefits of its non-use.

In firing at a moving vehicle, the following parameters should be considered:

a.	The intent of the suspect/s to harm the police officer or other persons;

b.	The capability of the suspect/s to harm with certainty the police officer or other persons; and

c.	Accessibility or the proximity of the suspect/s from the police officer and
other persons.

2.13  Filing of an Incident Report After the Use of Firearm. A police officer who fires his/her service firearm or weapon during a confrontation with an offender or offenders must submit an incident report outlining the circumstances necessitating the use of his/her firearm.




2.14	Procedures After an Armed Confrontation. Immediately after an armed
confrontation, the officer who is in charge of the operation, when applicable, shall:

a.	Secure the site of confrontation;

b.	Check whether the situation still poses imminent danger;

c.	Take photographs;

d.	Evacuate all wounded to the nearest hospital regardless of the extent
of injury;

e.	Keep arrested suspects in isolation;

f.	Conduct debriefing on all involved PNP operatives;

g.	Submit After-Operations Report; and

h.	Ensure	psychological	stress	counselling	for	all	involved	PNP Operatives.




     CHAPTER 3 POLICE OPERATIONS
      All PNP personnel shall respect and uphold the human rights and dignity of all persons at all times during the conduct of any police operations.



Rule 1 Patrol Operations



1.1 Patrol Guidelines

a. Conduct briefing before and debriefing after patrol operations

b. Perform firearm and equipment check prior to dispatch.

c. Observe precautionary measures and personal safety while on patrol;

d. Plan out patrol routes based on prevailing crime trends and patterns;

e. Observe defensive driving and follow traffic rules and regulations;

f. Establish good rapport with people on your beat and be familiar with all
the people in the community;

g. Patrol members must be always on the look-out for indications of vices
and other illegal activities on their beat;

h. Patrol members must be knowledgeable of all conditions, events and
details of places on their beat;




i. Be observant of people, places, situations or conditions and develop an inquisitive attitude especially if the subject appears to be slightly out of the ordinary;

j. Keep under close observation actions of juveniles, troublemakers / agitators and the mentally ill/retarded persons and report information to the concerned agency for appropriate action;

k. When requiring proof of identification from any person, let him/her hand it over to you;

l. Patrol members must inform tactical operations center before responding to any incident.

1.2 Patrol Duties

a. Patrol Supervisors

1) Make a patrol plan with the following details:

a) Area Coverage: safe haven, ambush areas and crime-
prone areas;

b) Organizational detail of personnel;

c) Duration;

d) Stand-by points; and

e) Route plan.

2) Designate members of the patrol team/s;

3) Conduct personnel and equipment check;

4) Conduct briefing prior to dispatch by disseminating any orders, directives or instructions from the Chief of Police (COP) or higher authorities and new policy or guidelines being implemented by the PNP Organization;




5) Render hourly report of personnel location and situation through radio/telephone/cellphone to Police Community Precinct (PCP)/ Station Headquarters Tactical Operation Center (TOC);

6) Render after-patrol report duly signed by duty supervisor. PCP Commanders shall collate and submit significant details to the Station Patrol Supervisor, who in turn, will submit the same to the Provincial/District Patrol Supervisor; and

7) Conduct debriefing immediately after the completion of patrol
duties.

b. Patrol Officers

1) Attend the roll call formation before his/her Tour of Duty for briefing and likewise attend the after Tour of Duty formation for debriefing;

2) Patrol the assigned beats, observe and check suspicious people,
structures/buildings, compounds and vehicles;

3) Observe and monitor public gatherings, prevent disorders and
disperse unlawful assemblies;

4) Inspect and/or conduct surveillance in various business establishments and other installations and remove hazards to public safety;

5) Check suspicious vehicles (private, public, or commercial/delivery
vehicles) in the course of their patrol;

6) Report occurrences and conditions which relate to crime, public
peace, order and safety;

7) Prevent crimes and arrest criminal offenders;

8) Conduct regular visitations, dialogues/consultations with the
residents and other stakeholders;

9) Assist personnel of responsible agencies/unit in facilitating the
flow of traffic at busy intersections/roads within his/her Area of




Responsibility (AOR), assist and provide pedestrian information
such as directions and street locations;

10) Respond to calls, entertain complaints, initiate the investigation and protection of the crime scene and minimize the after-effects of accidents, fires and other catastrophes;

11) Wear the prescribed patrol uniform;

12) Have the necessary equipment; and

13) Strictly observe "Buddy System" during the patrol operations.

c. Guidelines and Procedures when Responding to Calls for Police Assistance

1) Gather and note down in the patrol officer's notebook all available data as to the nature of the calls, date, time and name of the caller. It may be regular, urgent or emergency in nature.

2) Responding officers shall validate first before responding to calls for police assistance especially in areas with presence of threat groups.

3) The manner of approach will be dependent on the nature of the call, either with haste/secrecy or with/without flashing lights and sirens.

4) Consider the pertinent factors like the time, traffic conditions, the
possibility of greater damage and the neighborhood characteristics.

5) Whenever practicable and available, use and activate the BWC and comply with the guidelines and policies on the use thereof.

6) Stop the patrol car some distance from the scene.

7) Approach the scene on foot, in complete silence and exercising extreme caution.

8) Immediately attend to the injured unless the other members of the patrol are in imminent danger.




9) Focus all efforts to arrest criminals; however, priority shall be given
to aiding the injured.

10) Determine the crime committed, identify and question briefly the
victim/complainant and possible witnesses at the scene.

11) If the suspects or criminals have fled the scene before the arrival of the patrol team, interview witnesses and immediately relay any information gathered regarding the composition, appearance of the suspect, weapons used, mode and direction of escape and other information which may lead to the arrest of the suspects to the Operations Center for the conduct of dragnet operations

12) When responding to street fights/brawls, the patrol member may call for back-up before intervening. If there are no injuries and insufficient corroborative statements obtained to identify who started the fight, bring both parties to the police station for appropriate action.

13) Treat all calls for police assistance properly including complaints of nuisances caused by excessive sound, odor, smoke, blinding light among others

14) When responding to calls for police assistance due to suspected explosive device, never attempt to handle, move or lift the object. Instead contact TOC and request for Explosive Ordinance Disposal Team/K9 (EODT/K9). Immediately isolate and cordon the area within a safe distance from the suspected device. Divert the flow of traffic if necessary.

15) When responding to calls from beerhouses, KTV bars, or any other similar establishments, ensure that all the lights are switched on.

16) When responding to request for police assistance involving domestic violence, dispute between neighbors and landlords/ tenants, as much as possible, seek the presence of barangay officials and DSWD personnel as the case may be.

17) When responding to crime incidents involving a woman, either as victim or suspect, the presence of a female police officer is necessary.




18) When responding to police assistance related to highly infectious diseases, immediately inform the barangay concerned and the Station TOC for the observance of the health standard protocol.

19) When responding to cybercrime, secure and preserve the evidence and immediately seek assistance from cybercrime investigators.

20) When responding to a hostage taking situation, secure the scene, establish perimeter security and inform tactical operations center.



Rule 2 Law Enforcement Operations


2.1 Stopping and Frisking (Pat-Down Search)

a. When to Stop and Frisk (Pat-Down Search)

1) Stopping. The police officer may stop a person only when there is genuine reason to believe, based on experiences and the particular circumstances that a criminal activity may be afoot.

      The police officer must be able to point to specific facts that, when taken together with rational inferences, reasonably warrant the stop. Such facts include, but not limited to the following:

a) The person is reported to be allegedly involved in a criminal
activity;

b) The actions or demeanor of the person suggest that he/she
is engaged in a criminal activity;

c) The person is carrying something illegal or when his/her clothing bulges in a manner that suggests he/she is carrying a weapon; and

d) The person is seen at the time and place proximate to an alleged crime incident and/or flees at the sight of a police officer.




2) Body Frisking (Pat-Down Search). A police officer has the right to perform body frisking if the person has been stopped with genuine reason to believe that he/she carries weapon/s and poses a threat to the police officer's or another person's safety. Circumstances which may justify body frisking (pat-down search) include but not limited to the following:

a) Visual indication suggesting that the person is carrying a
firearm or other deadly weapon;

b) The type of crime believed to have been committed by the person, particularly crimes of violence where the threat of use or use of deadly weapon is involved; and

c) The threatening demeanor of the person.

b. Procedures and Guidelines

1) Stopping

a) When approaching the person, the police officer shall clearly identify himself/herself and present his/her identification card.

b) Police officers shall be courteous at all times but remain
cautious and vigilant.

c) Before approaching more than one person, police officers should determine whether the circumstances warrant a request for back-up or whether the stopping should be delayed until such back-up arrives.

d) Police officers shall confine their questions in relation to the grounds for stopping the person. In no instance shall a police officer stop a person longer than the period reasonably necessary.

e) Police officers are not required to inform the person of his/ her rights under the law (i.e. Miranda Warning, Anti-torture law, etc.) unless the person is placed under arrest.




2) Body Frisking (Pat-Down Search). When genuine reason justifies body frisking (pat-down search), it shall be done with due caution, restraint, and sensitivity in the following manner:

a) Whenever possible, body frisking shall be done by at least two police officers, one to do the search while the other provides security. it shall be done with the person in a standing position with hands raised. the police officers are permitted only to feel the outer clothing of the person. Police officers shall not place their hands inside the pockets of the clothing unless they feel an object that could probably be a weapon, such as a gun, knife, club, or the like.

b) If the person is carrying an object such as a handbag, suitcase, briefcase, sack, or other similar items that may conceal a weapon, the police officer shall not open the item but instead put it in a place out of the person's reach.

c) If the external patting of the person's clothing fails to disclose evidence of a weapon, no further search may be made. If a weapon is found and the possession of which constitutes a violation of the law, the police officer shall arrest the person and conduct a complete search.

c. Reporting After Stopping or Body Frisking. If after stopping or body frisking and the police officer finds no basis for making an arrest, he/ she should put it on record in his/her patrol notebook. If he/she finds a ground for a valid warrantless arrest, then an arrest shall be made.

2.2 Checkpoints

a. Authority to Establish Checkpoints. The establishment of checkpoints shall be authorized by the Head of Office of the territorial PNP unit and manned by uniformed PNP personnel. Other units may establish checkpoints in coordination with the Head of Office of the territorial PNP unit in the area. For this purpose, the Heads of Offices of territorial units are the following:

1) Regional Director (RD);




2) District Director;

3) Provincial Director;

4) City Director;

5) Chief of City/Municipal Police Station;

6) Station Commander;

7) Sub-Station Commander; and

8) Police Community Precinct Commander.

b. Composition. In the establishment of checkpoint, the checkpoint team shall be composed of, but not limited to, the following:

1) Team Leader (TL) - shall lead and take responsibility in the conduct of checkpoint preferably a Police Commissioned Officer (PCO). In the absence of a PCO, the most Senior Police Non-Commissioned Officer (PNCO) will act as Team Leader;

2) Spotter/Profiler - shall point/profile suspected vehicle subject for checkpoint;

3) Verifiers - shall conduct document verification, search, seizure and arrest, if necessary, initial custody of seized evidence;

4) Search/Arresting personnel - shall search, seize illegal items and
arrest offenders;

5) Forward/Rear Security- shall provide security in the checkpoint
area and block/pursue fleeing suspects/vehicle;

c. Checkpoint Guidelines

1) Checkpoints are established to enforce laws, rules, and regulations, and when there is a need to arrest a criminal or fugitive from justice.




2) Mobile checkpoints are authorized only when established in conjunction with ongoing police operations. Only marked vehicles with blinkers turned on shall be used in mobile checkpoints.

3) Designation of the personnel manning the checkpoint shall be left to the sound discretion of the Team Leader (TL), preferably with female personnel especially when there is an anticipated involvement of a female suspect.

4) The PNP Checkpoint team shall be composed of a minimum of eight personnel with a TL, two verifiers, one spotter, two forward security and two rear security.

5) The team manning the checkpoints must have immediate contact with any elected public official, and representative from the National Prosecution Service (NPS) or the media in case illegal drugs are seized or recovered.

6) The team should encourage the participation of the Local Government Units (LGUs), PNP accredited Civil Society Groups, Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs), business organizations, media and other stakeholders during the conduct of police checkpoint operations. However, their participation must be limited only as observers except for LGU personnel mandated to enforce laws and ordinances such as but not limited to traffic enforcers, meat inspectors and Barangay Public Safety Officers (BPSO).

7) PNP personnel manning the checkpoint must have a presentable appearance while wearing the prescribed uniform. Likewise, the civilian members must also be in their organization's uniform with their names conspicuously displayed for identification. In no case shall the civilian components be allowed to bear firearms during the checkpoint.

8) The area where the checkpoint shall be established must be well-lighted with a visible signage bearing the name and contact number of the PNP unit and the TL.

9) Due courtesy must be accorded to all road users during the conduct of checkpoint.




10) Team members must greet all persons subject for inspection, extend apology for the inconvenience, appeal for understanding, state the reasons of the checkpoint and thank them for their cooperation.

11) The team must signal the motorist(s) to slow down and courteously
request to turn-off the headlights and turn on cabin lights.

12) The conduct of inspection of vehicle during a routine checkpoint is limited to a visual search, done with due respect to all road users and conducted in a manner of least inconvenience. The occupants cannot be compelled to step out of the vehicle. Any search, seizure, and arrest shall be in accordance with the law.

13) A valid search must be authorized by a search warrant duly issued by an appropriate authority. However, a warrantless search can be made in the following cases:

a) When there is genuine reason to believe that the occupant/s of the vehicle have just committed, is actually committing or is about to commit a crime; or

b) On the basis of prior information which are reasonably corroborated by other attendant matters.

14) Violations/infractions of the law during the checkpoint shall be immediately acted upon following legal procedures. Arrested persons must be apprised of their constitutional rights.

15) The security of the PNP personnel, and most especially that of the civilians participating in the checkpoint, must be given due consideration in the planning of the operation.

16) As much as possible, only the forward/rear security team members are allowed to display their rifles and should be positioned where they can best provide security to the checkpoint team.

17) Checkpoint personnel may also provide police assistance in the vicinity e.g., giving directions to inquiring motorists or passersby.




18) Designated TL assigned at the checkpoint shall be responsible for the actuations and behavior of his/her personnel and shall be accountable under the doctrine of Command Responsibility.

19) The TL must submit an after-checkpoint report immediately upon termination of the operation.

d. Procedures in the Conduct of PNP Checkpoint

1) The TL shall inform his/her Chief of Police/ Station Commander
and Station TOC of the location of the checkpoint to be established;

2) The Unit Commander or official representative of NSUs and mobile forces must coordinate with the concerned LPU through its TOC or by other means before commencing with the checkpoint;

3) The station TOC shall then coordinate with the Higher Headquarters (HHQ) TOC, adjacent PNP units and other friendly forces of the established checkpoints;

4) The TL shall brief the PNP personnel, as well as the civilian components present, regarding the proper conduct of the checkpoint and their assigned tasks prior to their deployment;

5) The TL shall account his/her personnel and check if they are in the prescribed uniform. He/she shall ensure that their names are visible at all times. If wearing a ballistic vest, raincoat, reflectorized vest and other accessories worn over the uniform, their names shall likewise be visible;

6) The TL shall also check the following equipment including, but not limited to:

a) Marked  police  vehicles  (including  police  motorcycle  if
available);

b) Signages:

(1) Warning signs: (e.g., slowdown checkpoint ahead,
checkpoint 20 meters ahead, etc); and




(2) Information signs: name and contact number of the unit and TL.

c) Firearms with basic load of ammunition;

d) Ballistic vest;

e) Handheld and vehicle base radios;

f) Flashlights;

g) Megaphone; and

h) BWC or ARD.

7) The Spotter/Profiler of the team will be pre-positioned in a place where he/she can best point/profile suspected vehicles prior to their approach to the checkpoint;

8) Search/Arresting personnel shall flag down suspected vehicles and conduct search, seizure and arrest, if necessary. The search must be in accordance with the plain view doctrine except when there is a genuine reason to believe, based on experiences and the particular circumstances of each case, that criminal activity may be afoot;

9) In the event of seized drugs, the seizing personnel of the team having initial custody and control of the drugs shall immediately conduct physical inventory and photograph the same on site in the presence of the accused or the person/s from whom such items were confiscated and/or seized, or his/her representative or counsel and any elected public official to include representative from the media or NPS, if available, who shall be required to sign the copy of the inventory and be given a copy thereof. However, under justifiable grounds or circumstances, like when the safety of the team is compromised, the inventory may be done at the nearest police station or at the nearest office of the apprehending team;

10) In case the team has no investigator as team member, the arrested person/s and seized items shall be turned over to the station duty investigator for proper disposition;




11) In the event that the checkpoint is ignored, and the occupants of the vehicle opened fire on the personnel manning the checkpoint, the response of the team shall be in accordance with the use of Force Continuum as prescribed in Chapter 2 Section 2-4 of this POP;

12) The TL shall inform the station TOC before terminating the checkpoint. He/she shall conduct debriefing of personnel and submit after activity report for information of the COP/Station Commander prior submission to HHQ.

e. Procedures in the Conduct of On-the-Spot (Hasty) Checkpoints

1) Hasty checkpoint shall be immediately established upon receipt of
the instruction/ order/clearance from the Unit Commander;

2) PNP personnel conducting mobile patrols on board patrol vehicles will initially man the checkpoint, to be complemented with the arrival of reinforcement. A collapsible prescribed signage with markings: "Stop, Police Checkpoint" if available, indicating also the name and the contact number of the concerned police office/unit and TL conducting the operations, will be used for the purpose;

3) In the case of PNP personnel conducting Internal Security Operation (ISO) or foot patrol, where a vehicle and collapsible signage is not readily available, the team shall hastily put-up improvised barriers/ barricades or early warning signages to indicate the established checkpoint that is manned by said personnel;

4) The team shall immediately inform the station TOC of the nearest police unit of the exact location of the hasty checkpoint established to include the name and contact number of the TL and equipment used;

5) Where there is a possibility of high-risk stop and/or arrest, and public safety might be at risk, no civilian or media shall be allowed in the area;

6) The Unit Commander of the personnel manning the hasty checkpoint shall immediately send additional personnel, equipment




and signage to the area in order to convert the Hasty Checkpoint
into a standard Checkpoint; and

7) As soon as the Hasty Checkpoint is converted into a standard Checkpoint, TL shall follow the procedures in the conduct of PNP checkpoint stated in Rule 2.2d of this POP.

f. Procedures in the Conduct of Joint Checkpoints

1) Commission on Elections (COMELEC) Checkpoints

a) The establishment of COMELEC checkpoints must be in accordance with the Omnibus Election Code, election laws and prevailing resolutions. The procedures in the conduct of PNP checkpoint stated in Rule 2.2d of this POP shall be made supplemental;

b) As much as possible, there shall be at least one COMELEC checkpoint for each city/ municipality. However, additional checkpoints, may be established in coordination with the Election Officer (EO).

c) Additional checkpoints coming from PNP units other than the LPUs shall be coordinated with the concerned COP/Station Commander and EO.

d) In establishing on-the-spot (hasty) checkpoints, the team leader shall give prior notice and coordination with the EO having jurisdiction over the area.

2) Inter-Agency Checkpoints (DENR, DA, BFAR, etc)

a) There shall be an existing agreement and/or written request from the agency concerned prior to the establishment of checkpoint.

b) In case of apprehension, the nominal complainant shall be the concerned agency and will be in charge in the conduct of investigation, filing of cases and custody of evidence. All arrested persons shall be in the custody of the PNP.




c) The signboard to be placed on the checkpoint shall bear the names and contact numbers of both PNP and agency TL.

3) Joint PNP-AFP Checkpoints

a) The PNP shall take the lead role in a joint PNP-AFP checkpoint.

b) The signboard to be placed on the checkpoint shall bear the names and contact numbers of both PNP and AFP TL.

c) In case of arrest and seizure, the PNP shall take cognizance of the case.

g. General Procedures to be Followed When Checkpoint is Ignored

1) If the checkpoint is ignored and/or the motorist bumps the signage in an attempt to elude arrest or avoid inspection, the team shall pursue the fleeing motorist and immediately inform the adjacent units about the situation and the available description of the vehicle and passenger/s to establish hasty defensive roadblock and dragnet operation.

2) The pursuing team shall use megaphones or built-in public address system in the police car with blinkers and sirens switched on during the pursuit to order the fleeing motorist to stop and to warn other road users following the rules on the use of firearm during police operations in Chapter 2 Section 2-5 of this POP.

3) If the motorist stops, the procedures in flagging down vehicles in
Rule 2.3 paragraphs e to i of this POP shall apply.

4) If the fleeing motorist opens fire at the pursuing team, the reasonable force provided in the use of force continuum in Chapter 2 Section 2-4 of this POP to overcome the aggression must be employed.

2.3 Flagging Down Vehicles

a. Procedures in Flagging Down Vehicles for Possible Involvement in the Commission of a Crime.




1) Before flagging down the vehicle, call the station TOC and provide
the following available information:

a) Plate number and/or conduction sticker;

b) Brand/make, series, type (sedan, SUV, AUV, etc) and color;

c) Number and/or description of occupants;

d) Reason(s) for the planned intervention;

e) Location and its direction.

2) The station TOC shall immediately verify with the provincial/city highway patrol team with the said vehicle information. Simultaneous verification can be made with the Land Transportation Office (LTO) vehicle verification system thru text number 2600 by texting "LTO vehicle (vehicle plate number)." Example: LTO vehicle ABC1234;

3) If upon verification, the motor vehicle is not involved in any crime the patrollers shall no longer pursue the vehicle;

4) If subject of an alarm or complaint, the patroller shall direct the driver to pull over or stop on the road side.

5) If the vehicle stops, the patrollers shall likewise position their vehicle in an advantageous distance behind the subject vehicle.

6) Using the vehicle public address (PA) system, patrollers shall introduce themselves and command the driver to do the following:

a) Roll down the window;

b) Turn on the hazard light;

c) Turn on the cabin light if necessary; and

d) Switch off the engine;




7) If the vehicle occupants are compliant, the patrollers shall cautiously approach the vehicle from behind and perform the following:

a) Inform them the reason why they were stopped;

b) Require the driver to present his/her driver's license and OR/
CR of the vehicle; and

c) Direct the driver to follow them to the nearest police station/
unit;

8) Verify the authenticity of the driver's license with the LTO vehicle verification system thru text number 2600 by texting "LTO license (license number)". Example: LTO license A1234567890

9) If the vehicle occupants are non-compliant, the patrollers shall perform the following as warranted by the circumstances:

a) Remain in the patrol vehicle, request for back-up, remain tactically alert and warn civilians in the area of a possible armed confrontation;

b) Using the PA system, repeatedly demand the driver to comply with the instructions in Rule 2.3a6) and to throw the ignition key outside the vehicle;

c) If capable, effect the arrest of occupants in accordance with the provisions on Arrest Without Warrant under Rule 2.6e of this POP; and

d) If back-up is necessary, wait for their arrival before effecting the arrest;

10) If the motorist flees, despite the repeated warnings the team shall pursue the fleeing motorist and immediately update the station TOC and adjacent units about the current situation;

11) If the intervention resulted in an armed confrontation, the response shall be in accordance with the Force Continuum in Chapter 2 Section 2-4 and Procedures After an Armed Confrontation in Chapter 2 Section 2-5 paragraph 2.14 of this POP; and




12) Update the station/unit TOC of the development.

b. Procedures in Flagging Down Vehicles for Violation of Traffic Laws,
Rules and Regulations

1) The applicable procedures provided in Rule 2.3a shall be followed;

2) If the motor vehicle is under a nationwide alarm, it shall be reported
to the nearest HPG office within 48 hours;

3) Immediately issue a Traffic Violation Receipt (TVR), or Temporary Operator's Permit (TOP) as appropriate. Never indulge in prolonged and unnecessary conversation or argument;

4) Confiscation of any unauthorized or illegal device or accessory such as those provided in Presidential Decree (PD) No. 96 shall be covered by a receipt;

5) In case of impoundable offenses, inform the motorist of the violation and where the vehicle will be impounded. The said vehicle shall be covered with a Technical Inspection and Inventory Receipt (TIIR) and an impounding receipt; and

6) In cases where there is reasonable ground to believe that the driver is drunk, the procedures in flagging down motorists who are under the influence of alcohol, and/or dangerous drugs and similar substances provided in Rule 2.3c of this POP shall be followed.

c. Procedures in Flagging Down Motorists Who are Under the Influence of
Alcohol, and/or Dangerous Drugs and Similar Substances.

     In the implementation of the Anti-Drunk and Drugged Driving Law (RA 10586), the flagging down should be incidental to a traffic stop or preceded by a probable cause that the deputized PNP personnel has reasonable ground to believe that the motorist is under the influence of alcohol, dangerous drugs and/or other similar substances upon personally witnessing a traffic offense committed by means of lane straddling, making sudden stops, speeding, swerving or weaving.




     The evident smell of alcohol in a driver's breath, generally slurred speech in response to questioning, bloodshot or reddish eyes, flushed face, poor coordination, difficulty in understanding and responding intelligently to questions shall also constitute probable cause.

     As far as practicable, there must be at least one personnel in the accosting team who is trained and deputized by the LTO and equipped with a calibrated Alcohol Breath Analyzer (ABA). In the absence of a deputized PNP personnel, the team shall immediately seek his/her assistance if there is a suspected drunk or drugged motorist.

1) Screening for Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol

The deputized police officer shall perform and be guided by the
following:

a) Upon personal determination of probable cause, he/she shall flag down the motor vehicle, direct the motorist to step out of the vehicle, and determine whether the driver is under the influence of intoxicating drink or substance. If there is reasonable ground to believe that the motorist is drunk, expressly inform the motorist of his/her assessment and direct him/her to perform all the three field sobriety tests (eye test, walk-and-turn, and one-leg stand) on site;

b) Record the motorist's responses to the field sobriety tests to form part of the records of the case;

c) If the motorist fails any of the three field sobriety tests, determine his/her blood alcohol concentration (BAC) level, through the use of the ABA on site;

d) If the motorist passes all of the three field sobriety tests, he/ she shall be cited for the initial traffic offense only and shall no longer be subjected to ABA test;

e) A motorist who refuses to undergo the mandatory testing as required shall have his/her driver's license confiscated and be cited for all other violations that he/she has committed. If upon assessment the motorist poses hazard to the public,




he/she will not be allowed to continue driving and he/she
shall be brought to the police station for proper disposition;

f) A motorist who registered a BAC above the allowable limit shall be placed under arrest and the motor vehicle shall be turned over to the nearest LTO or other authorized impounding area;

g) In case of a BAC within the allowed limit, he/she shall only be
cited for the initial traffic offense;

h) A motorist who has undergone and passed the field sobriety test and/or ABA test may be subjected to a drug screening test;

i) If the ABA test exceeds the allowable limit, the deputized PNP personnel with the assistance of the duty investigator shall prepare pertinent documents for the filing of case.

2) Screening for Driving Under the Influence of Dangerous Drugs
and Other Similar Substances

The deputized police officer shall perform and be guided by
the following:

a) Upon personal determination of probable cause, he/she shall flag down the motor vehicle, direct the motorist to step out of the vehicle, and determine whether the motorist is under the influence of intoxicating drink or substance. If there is reasonable ground to believe that the motorist is drugged, he/ she shall expressly inform the motorist of his/her assessment and shall bring the motorist to the nearest police station;

b) The motorist shall be subjected to a drug screening test by the crime laboratory. If found positive, a drug confirmatory test shall be conducted;

c) A motorist who has undergone and passed the drug test shall
not be subjected to a field sobriety test and/or ABA test;




d) After a positive confirmation, the deputized PNP personnel with the assistance of the duty investigator shall prepare pertinent documents for the filing of case;

e) If the confirmatory drug test turns out negative, the motorist shall only be cited for the initial traffic offense.

3) Mandatory Alcohol and Chemical Testing of Drivers Involved in Road Crash Incidents

a) A motorist involved in a road crash incident resulting in the loss of human life or physical injuries shall be subjected to onsite field sobriety test and ABA testing, whenever practicable, and thereafter, chemical tests, including a drug screening test and, if necessary, a drug confirmatory test as mandated under RA 9165, to determine the presence and/or concentration of alcohol, dangerous drugs and/or similar substances in the bloodstream or body. Other alcohol testing equipment, such as Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectroscopy (GCMS) may be used, whenever the use of an ABA is not practicable under prevailing circumstances.

b) A motorist who refuses to undergo the mandatory testing as required shall have his/her driver's license confiscated and be cited for all other violations that he/she has committed. He/she shall be brought to the nearest police station for the filing of the appropriate case.

2.4 High-Risk Stop and High-Risk Arrest. This is the stopping/accosting and restraint of armed and dangerous person/s, aboard a vehicle/vessel or on foot, including the power to use all necessary and legal means to accomplish such end.

a. General Setting

1) Initial Stage

     Upon receipt of information regarding the movement of persons/ groups involved in the commission of a crime, or unauthorized movement of armed person/s or group/s, including government troops, the following shall be performed:




a) Ensure that there are personnel/team tailing and monitoring
the movement of the fleeing person/s or group/s;

b) Organize appropriate tactical security forces utilizing maximum firepower, armor, water and air assets as the case may be;

c) Deploy the security forces to stopping zones in defensive
position; and

d) Seal off the area and establish strong roadblocks/ barricades.

2) Effecting a High-Risk Stop and Arrest

When effecting high-risk stop, the police officer shall:

a) Exert utmost effort to persuade the suspects to halt or stop their movement;

b) Start with the procedural conduct of regular warrantless
arrest where arrest is inevitable;

c) Ensure proper documentation of the process; and

d) Respect the rights of all the persons involved.

3) During Violent Stage

     The PNP shall strictly adhere to Use of Force Policy provided in Chapter 2 Section 2-4 of this POP, particularly on the Force Continuum.

b. Maritime Setting

1) Initial Stage

a) For movements of suspects towards ports, piers and coastal areas, the concerned units shall coordinate with the Maritime Group (MG);




b) Coordination with other maritime agencies such as the Philippine Coast Guard (PCG), Philippine Navy (PN), Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources (BFAR) among others shall be made when necessary; and

c) In case the suspects are aboard a vessel, the description of the vessel shall be determined and the location for possible maritime interdiction shall be identified for deployment of police patrol vessel.

2) Effecting a High-Risk Stop and Arrest

a) During seaborne interdiction, the applicable procedure for high-risk vessel boarding shall be followed under the Maritime Law Enforcement procedures of the MG;

b) During the high-risk vessel boarding, the procedure on the Force Continuum under Chapter 2 Section 4 shall be followed; and

c) After the high-risk vessel interdiction, the arrested suspects and seized evidence shall be processed following the rule on arrest, search and seizure.

3) During violent stage

a) The patrol vessel shall be maneuvered in a position and direction that will minimize possible damage to the vessel and minimize risk to the interdiction team;

b) During this stage, the procedures on the Force Continuum under Chapter 2 Section 2-4 of this POP and the Maritime Law Enforcement procedures of the MG shall be followed.

c) All injured suspect shall be brought to the nearest hospital
and provided medical intervention as necessary;

d) All arrested suspects and seized evidence shall be processed
following the rule on arrest, search and seizure; and




e) The suspect's vessel shall be brought to the impounded area
pending the disposition of the case filed in court.

c. Airport Setting

1) Landside Area

a) Initial Stage

     If a vehicle disregarded the Vehicle Screening Area (VSA) and drove fast towards the terminal building, the following procedures shall be undertaken:

(1) VSA personnel shall immediately inform all security forces in the airport using radio, cellphone and other fastest means of communication; and

(2) They shall pursue the fleeing vehicle and stop them
before reaching the terminal building.

b) Effecting a High-Risk Stop and Arrest

     The VSA personnel shall direct the driver to park at the roadside following the procedures in flagging down vehicles provided under Rule 2.3a of this POP.

(1) If the fleeing vehicle failed to stop, the VSA personnel shall immediately inform the Aviation Security Group (AVSEGROUP) personnel at the terminal building to activate airport lockdown procedure; and

(2) They shall continue pursuing the fleeing suspects until
arrested.

c) During Violent Stage

(1) If the fleeing vehicle deliberately hit the airport users or rammed the airport terminal barriers, AVSEGROUP personnel shall use or employ all necessary and absolute force to stop the vehicle and its occupants.




(2) If the vehicle finally stops, follow the applicable provisions of the Force Continuum provided in Chapter 2 Section 2-4 of this POP.

2) Airside Area

a) Initial Stage

     If the fleeing vehicle is able to reach the terminal building and its occupants dismounted, the following procedures shall be undertaken:

(1) Immediately direct the terminal building guards to close
the entrance gate; and

(2) If the suspect is unarmed, direct him/her to stop and surrender following the procedures on Arrest provided under Rule 2.6 of this POP.

b) Effecting a high-risk stop and arrest

     The contingency plan for such incident embodied in the airport security program of the concerned airport shall be applied.

c) During violent stage

     If the fleeing vehicle was not stopped and has reached the airside area, the contingency plan of such incident embodied in the airport security program of the concerned airport shall be applied.

2.5 Police Defensive Roadblock. Police Defensive Roadblock is a temporary installation or hastily built barricade set for halting traffic to facilitate the neutralization of an armed person/suspect onboard a motor vehicle.

a. Pre-Conditions in Establishing Police Defensive Roadblocks. A police defensive roadblock may be established in any of the following conditions/situations:

1) The object vehicle/s must be the subject of a recent flash alarm;




2) The driver/occupants of the vehicle are presumed hostile and will
not stop at the checkpoint;

3) The vehicle disregarded a police-established checkpoint when
flagged down;

4) The identified vehicle and occupants must be the subject of a police case/combat operational plan;

5) There is unauthorized troop movement; or

6) There must be validated information on any of the following:

a) On-going hot pursuit/police chase;

b) Movement of suspected armed persons onboard a motor
vehicle;

c) Report of suspected armed men who have just committed a
crime;

d) Vehicle carrying escaped prisoner; or

e) Armed motorcycle riding criminals.

b. Procedures in Establishing Roadblock

1) Upon receipt of information/order to immediately establish a police defensive roadblock, the Officer-of-the-Day (OD) or the most senior police officer on duty of the concerned unit shall organize sufficient police tactical security forces, utilizing maximum firepower and other available equipment (if any) and shall immediately proceed to the designated area;

2) Upon arrival, immediately set up physical barriers using all available resources in the vicinity. The TL shall perform the following:

a) Inform the headquarters the exact location of the roadblock to include personnel involved, available equipment and marked vehicles;




b) Brief the elements/members on the purpose of the police
roadblock and their method of intervention;

c) Immediately contact adjacent units to inform them of the situation so that these units can conduct dragnet operation, while the members of the pursuing team shall tail or pursue the fleeing suspect's vehicle;

d) Designate forward observers/spotters and rear security;

e) Deploy security forces in a strategic and defensive position;

f) Place road spikes or tire deflation system if available; and

g) Designate a recorder to ensure that the whole intervention
procedure is documented;

3) As much as possible, the area where the roadblock shall be established must be properly lighted during nighttime with noticeable signage;

4) Police car lights must be turned on at all times during the operation;

5) When the suspect's vehicle stops, the procedures in flagging down vehicles for possible involvement in the commission of a crime in Rule 2.3a of this POP shall be followed.

6) Procedures when suspects open fire/engage the troops:

a) In the event that the occupants of the vehicle open fires on the personnel manning the roadblock, the procedures in the Force Continuum under Chapter 2 Section 2-4 of this POP shall be applied;

b) Avoid panic firing;

c) Avoid collateral damage;

d) Account for the fatalities and give immediate medical
assistance to the injured; and




e) Secure the crime scene and wait for the arrival of SOCO and Investigator-on-case (IOC).

7) When the suspect/s surrender or are arrested, they must be informed of the arresting officer's identity, authority and the basis of the arrest and apprised of their constitutional rights;

8) Fleeing Vehicles

If the motorist flees despite the repeated warnings the team shall:

a) Pursue the fleeing motorist and immediately update the station TOC and adjacent units about the current situation;

b) Fleeing vehicles shall not be fired upon;

c) Inform the headquarters of the make or type, plate number and color of the motor vehicle to be accosted including the number of occupants and, if possible, their identity; and

d) Give mobile car's location and the direction of the suspect's escape

9) After the police defensive roadblock operation, an after operations report must be submitted.

2.6 Arrest

a. General Guidelines

1) All arrests should be made only on the basis of a valid warrant of arrest issued by a judge, except in instances where the law allows warrantless arrest.

2) No violence or unnecessary force shall be used in making an arrest, and the person to be arrested shall not be subjected to any restraint greater than what is necessary under the circumstances. (The Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure, rule 113 sec. 2).




3) Arrests can be made on any day of the week and at any time of the day or night (The Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure, rule 113 sec. 6).

4) If the accused is already in detention, a return, together with required documents, shall be made for any standing warrants of arrest issued after the service.

5) A senator or member of the House of Representatives shall, in all offenses punishable by not more than six years imprisonment, be privileged from arrest while the congress is in session. No member shall be questioned nor be held liable in any other place for any speech or debate in the congress or in any committee thereof (Const. (1987), art. VI sec. 11 (Phil.).

6) Diplomatic agents and couriers, under the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations (1961 p8), are not liable to any form of arrest or detention.

b. Authority of the Arresting Officer when Making an Arrest

1) A police officer making a lawful arrest may verbally summon as many persons as he/she deems necessary to assist him/her in effecting the arrest (The Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure, rule 113 sec. 10).

2) A police officer, in order to make an arrest with or without warrant, may break into a building or enclosure where the person to be arrested is or is reasonably believed to be in, if he is refused admittance thereto, after announcing his/her authority and purpose (The Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure, rule 113 sec. 11).

3) Whenever a police officer has entered the building or enclosure to make an arrest, he/she may break out therefrom, when necessary, to liberate him/herself (The Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure, rule 113 sec. 12).

4) If a person lawfully arrested escapes or is rescued, any person may immediately pursue to retake him/her without a warrant at any time and in any place within the Philippines (The Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure, rule 113 sec. 13).




c. Duties of the Arresting Officer

1) In implementing the warrant of arrest, the arresting officers shall use at least one BWC and one ARD, or a minimum of two devices, or such number as may be necessary. In case of unavailability of BWCs, the arresting officers shall file an ex-parte motion (Annex "D") before the court, requesting authority to use at least two ARDs for justifiable reasons.

2) The BWC/ARD shall be used and activated upon arrival at the place of arrest to capture and record the relevant incidents during the execution of the warrant. The BWC/ARD shall be worn in a conspicuous location and in a manner that maximizes the ability to capture a recording of the arrest. It shall only be deactivated upon conclusion of the arrest and delivery of the person/s arrested to the nearest police station or jail. The same shall be observed in cases of warrantless arrests, whenever BWCs/ARDs were used.

3) It shall be the duty of the police officer implementing the Warrant of Arrest to deliver the arrested person without delay to the nearest Police Station or jail (The Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure, rule 113 sec. 3) to record the fact of the arrest;

4) At the time of the arrest, it shall be the duty of the arresting officer to inform the person arrested of the cause of the arrest and the fact that a warrant had been issued for his/her arrest. The arresting officer need not have the warrant in his/her possession at the time of the arrest but after the arrest, if the person arrested so requires, the warrant shall be shown to him/her as soon as possible (The Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure, rule 113 sec. 7);

5) When a woman is arrested, a policewoman shall conduct the
complete body search;

6) When a Child in Conflict with the Law (CICL) is arrested, he/she shall be processed by the Women's and Children's Protection Desks (WCPD) officer and shall immediately be separated from other adult suspects. He/she must be turned over to the LSWDO or other accredited NGOs within eight hours after apprehension;




7) If a foreign national is arrested, the arresting officer through his/
her COP/Unit Commander, shall perform the following:

a) Simultaneously inform the Foreign Liaison Division (FLD), Directorate for Intelligence (DI), PNP Command Center (PCC) and the immediate higher office through Short Messaging System (SMS) within one hour upon the arrest;

b) Submit a written report of the incident within eight hours to
the immediate higher office.

8) In case of arrest without a warrant, it shall be the duty of the arresting officer to inform the person to be arrested of his/her identity, authority and the basis of the arrest except when he/she flees or forcibly resists before the arresting officer has the opportunity to inform him/her or when the giving of such information will imperil the arrest (The Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure, rule 113 sec. 8);

9) The person arrested, with or without warrant, shall be informed of his/her constitutional right to remain silent and that any statement he/she makes could be used against him/her. Also, that he/she has the right to communicate with his/her lawyer or his/her immediate family and the right to physical examination. It shall be the duty of arresting officer to subject arrested person with or without warrant to a medical examination prior to temporary detention;

10) A person arrested without a warrant shall be immediately brought to the Police Station for investigation without unnecessary delay. He/she shall be subjected to inquest proceedings within the time prescribed in Article 125 of the Revised Penal Code (RPC);

11) No torture, force, violence, threat, intimidation, or any other means which vitiate the free will shall be used against an arrested person. The bringing of arrested persons to secret detention places, solitary confinement and the like is prohibited;

12) The arresting officer shall ensure that the arrested person is free from torture or physical abuse;




13) If the person arrested without a warrant waives his/her right under the provisions of Art 125 of the Revised Penal Code, the arresting officer shall ensure that the former signs a waiver of detention in the presence of his/her counsel of choice; and

14) If the person arrested waives his/her right against self-incrimination and chooses to give his/her statement, the arresting officer shall ensure that the waiver is made in writing and signed by the person arrested in the presence of a counsel of his/her own choice or a competent and independent counsel provided by the government.

d. Arrest with Warrant

1) Warrant of Arrest

     The warrant of arrest is the written authority for the arresting officer when making an arrest or taking of a person into custody in order that he/she may be bound to answer for the commission of an offense. The head of the office to whom the warrant of arrest has been delivered for implementation shall cause the warrant to be implemented within ten days from receipt. Within ten days after the expiration of such period, the police officer to whom it was assigned for implementation shall make a report to the judge who issued the warrant and in case of his/her failure to implement the same, shall state the reasons thereof.

2) Procedures in Serving Warrant of Arrest

a) Verify the validity of the Warrant of Arrest;

b) In serving the warrant, the police officer should introduce himself/herself and show proper identification;

c) The person/s arrested shall be notified as early as practicable, that the arrest is being recorded with the BWC/ARD and that the arrest is by virtue of the warrant;

d) Make a manifestation of authority against the person to be
arrested;




e) If refused entry, the police officer may break into any residence, office, building, and other structure where the person to be arrested is in or is reasonably believed to be in, after announcing his/her purpose;

f) The police officer need not have a copy of the warrant in his/her possession at the time of the arrest. If the person arrested so requires, the warrant shall be shown to the arrested person as soon as possible;

g) Secure the person to be arrested and use handcuffs for the protection of the arresting officer, other individuals or the arrested person himself/herself;

h) Conduct thorough search for weapons and other illegal materials on the person arrested and surroundings within his/her immediate control;

i) Inform the person to be arrested of his/her rights under the
law (i.e. Miranda Warning and Anti-torture Warning);

j) No unnecessary force shall be used in making an arrest;

k) Confiscated evidence shall be properly documented with the chain of custody of evidence duly and clearly established;

l) Bring the arrested person to the Police Station or office of the arresting unit for documentation;

m) Make a Return of Warrant to the court of origin (Annex "E");

n) Deliver the arrested person to the designated jail/prison facility immediately upon the receipt of the commitment order from the court; and

o) In case of failure to execute the warrant of arrest, the officer to whom it was assigned for execution shall, within 30 days from such assignment, file a report stating the reasons for such failure.




e. Arrests without a Warrant

1) A peace officer or a private person may, without a warrant, arrest
a person:

a) When, in his/her presence, the person to be arrested has committed, is actually committing, or is attempting to commit an offense;

b) When an offense has just been committed and he/she has probable cause to believe, based on personal knowledge of facts or circumstances, that the person to be arrested has committed it;

c) When the person to be arrested is a prisoner who has escaped from a penal establishment or place where he/she is serving final judgment or temporarily confined while his/ her case is pending, or has escaped while being transferred from one confinement area to another (The Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure, rule 113 sec. 5);

d) Where the accused released on bail attempts to leave the
country without court permission;

e) Violation of conditional pardon, punishable under Article 159 of the Revised Penal Code as a case of evasion of service of sentence; and

f) Arrest following a Deportation Proceeding by the Immigration Commissioner against illegal and undesirable aliens.

2) Effecting Warrantless Arrest

a) Make use and activate the BWC/ARD if available and practicable. Notify the person/s arrested, as early as practicable, that the arrest is being recorded with the BWC/ ARD;

b) Freeze or restrain the suspect/s;




c) Make proper introduction as to identity and authority to arrest;

d) Inform the arrested person of the circumstances of his/ her arrest and recite the Miranda Warning and Anti-torture Warning to him/her;

e) Secure the person to be arrested and use handcuffs for the protection of the arresting officer, other individuals or the arrested person him/herself;

f) Conduct thorough search for weapons and other illegal materials on the person arrested and surroundings within his/her immediate control;

g) Confiscated evidence shall be properly documented with the chain of custody of evidence duly and clearly established;

h) No unnecessary force shall be used in making an arrest; and

i) Bring the arrested person to the police station for further investigation and disposition.

f. Physical/Medical Examination of Arrested Person/Suspect. Before detention, the person arrested must be physically/medically examined by a medical doctor preferably of his/her own choice. If the person arrested is a female, she shall be attended to preferably by a female medical doctor.

g. Booking of Arrested Suspect. Booking of arrested suspects shall be undertaken to record and document the information surrounding the arrest of the suspect.

    The following are the procedures, duties and responsibilities of personnel during the booking of arrested suspects:

1) Arresting Officer (AO) shall:

a) Immediately bring the suspect/s to the police station and present him/her to the Desk Officer (DO) for recording in the police blotter the circumstances of the arrest as well as his/ her identity;




b) Conduct a more thorough body search of the suspect/s. When women and/or minors are among those arrested, the duty WCPD officer shall do the thorough body search. Any deadly weapon and illegal items found and seized shall also be recorded in the blotter. The AO shall indicate his/her rank and name and duly sign in the blotter entry;

c) Request the DO to prepare the "Request for Medical
Examination of the Suspect" Form (Annex "F");

d) Bring/escort the suspects to the government hospital referred
to in the request form for the examination of the suspects;

e) After the physical/medical examination of the suspects, bring them back to the police station and turn them over, with the results of the examination, to the Duty Investigator (DI); and;

f) Obtain the "Arrest and Booking Form" (Annex "G") and refer it to the DI so that they will diligently accomplish it. The copy of the Arrest and Booking Form shall form part of the case folder and be kept at the Investigation Section at the police station;

g) Prepare and file the corresponding report to the judge on the execution of the warrant. The report shall be accompanied by affidavits of the PNP personnel whose BWCs/ARDs were used (Annex "H"), stating the following:

(1) The date, time, and place of the recording;

(2) The manner by which the recording was taken and stored, and when applicable, the fact of unavailability of BWCs and that a resort to ARDs was necessary, and the circumstances detailing the non-activation, interruption, or sudden termination of the recording;

(3) The fact that persons of the recording were notified of the use of BWCs/ARDs;




(4) The date, time, place and other circumstances surrounding the first instance of retrieval or download of the recording from the cameras;

(5) The names and positions of the persons who had possession of and access to the recordings, including details of such access, from the time of their taking until their deposit with the court;

(6) The fact of redaction of personal identifiers appearing in the recording whenever applicable, the special circumstances justifying such redaction, and the details redacted;

(7) Whenever applicable, a certification that both unredacted and redacted files containing the recordings are submitted to the court;

(8) The names and positions of the officers who will be delivering the recordings to the court;

(9) Reasonable ground in case of noncompliance with any of the requirements on the use of BWCs/ARDs, including all acts undertaken showing genuine and sufficient efforts exerted to ensure compliance thereof.

2) Desk Officer (DO) shall:

a) Log and record the details of the arrest made and assign a blotter entry number. It shall include the name of the arresting officer and the five "W"s and one "H" (Who, What, Where, When, Why and How) as well as the name of the government hospital to where the suspect/s will be referred to for physical/medical examination; and

b) Prepare or accomplish the "Medical Examination of the Suspects Request Form" (Annex "F") to be signed by the OD. In his/her absence, the DO may sign the request form himself/herself.




3) Duty Investigator (DI) shall:

a) Diligently accomplish the "Arrest and Booking Form" (Annex "G") and "Medical Examination Result Sheet" (Annex "I") with the AO and ensure that a copy of the results of the physical/ medical examination is attached;

b) Conduct record check to determine if the arrested suspect/s have previous or existing cases and/or standing warrant of arrest;

c) Ensure that Mug Shots of the suspects are taken in four different methods while standing straight in front of the prescribed booking mug shot backdrop and holding the prescribed identification board. The 4R mug shots shall be attached or printed in the "Booking Mug Shots" Form (Annex "J");

d) While completing the necessary documents for inquest, the arrested suspect shall be temporarily turned-over to the jailer/custodial officer and covered by a "Turn-over of Arrested Suspect/s" Form (Annex "K") and a "Jailer's Receipt of Suspects" Form (Annex "L");

e) All personal valuables of the suspect that are not allowed to be brought inside the custodial facility shall be collected by the Investigator and turned-over to the station Evidence/ Property Custodian. The Investigator shall prepare a "Suspects Property Receipt" Form (Annex "M");

f) Ensure that the suspects' fingerprints and tenprints are taken only by a trained personnel using both the "Arrest and Booking Form" (Annex "G") and the standard "Tenprint Card" PNPCL Form No 452-038 (Annex "N") to ensure that this will be readable by the Automated Fingerprint identification System (AFIS). The tenprint card is considered as an integral part of the booking form;

g) Inform the Desk Officer and personnel in charge of the Next
Generation Investigation Systems (NGIS) of the status of the




case and the suspect so that updates will be entered in the
police blotter and the NGIS;

h) Prepare the necessary documents such as but not limited to: affidavit of complaint; affidavit of witness; booking and arrest report; photo copy of recovered evidence if any; and a letter of case referral to the Prosecutor's Office that should be reviewed and signed by the COP/Station/Unit Commander; and

i) Submit to the prosecutor conducting the inquest proceedings, the BWC/ARD recordings along with the affidavit of arrest, in case of warrantless arrests.

4) The PNP personnel who wore the BWC/ARD shall

a) Turn-over to the Data Custodian all recordings for downloading
from the BWC/ARD after the conduct of arrest; and

b) Execute the affidavit of arrest, in coordination with the DI and other arresting officers, if any.

5) The Data Custodian (DC) shall:

a) Receive, have custody, download within 24 hours from the recording, store to an external media storage device and encrypt all recordings of BWCs/ARDs in the conduct of arrest and simultaneously deposit the same in a sealed package with the issuing court. In case of warrantless arrests, the DC shall turn-over the sealed package to the DI who will be responsible to submit the same to the inquest prosecutor. This shall include recordings captured by media representatives relative to Section 21 of RA 9165, as amended;

b) Retain a back-up copy for justifiable reasons for a period not exceeding 15 days, only with leave of court;

c) Ensure the security, confidentiality and integrity of the recordings;




d) Redact sensitive information, images and other personal identifiers from the recordings, such as in cases involving minors, sexual offenses, or domestic violence. Submit all redacted and unredacted file/s to the court;

e) Ensure that no tampering is done during the downloading process. Consequently, allow the subjects of the recordings or their counsels to witness the downloading of the recordings from the BWCs/ARDs prior to safekeeping.

f) Preserve	the	metadata	contained	in	the	BWC/ARD
recordings;

g) Limit viewing access of the footage to:

(1) Any person who is a subject of the recording or his/her
counsel;

(2) The parent, guardian, or counsel of any minor who is a
subject of the recording;

(3) The spouse, next of kin, or legally authorized designee of a deceased subject of the recording, or his/her counsel; and

(4) PNP personnel whose camera captured the recording
belongs;

h) Provide a copy of the recording to the persons enumerated in aforementioned item g) (1) to (3) should the person subject of the recording consented to its use in a court proceeding, and if the request is done within five days from data downloading.

2.7 Search and Seizure

a. Requisites for the Issuance of Search Warrant.

    A search warrant shall be issued only upon probable cause in connection with one specific offense to be determined personally by the judge after examination under oath or affirmation of the complainant and the witnesses presented. The search warrant shall particularly describe the




place to be searched and the things to be seized which may be anywhere in the Philippines. It includes the order requiring the use of at least one BWC and one ARD, or a minimum of two devices, or such number as may be necessary to capture and record the relevant incidents during its execution.

1) The following properties may be the objects of a search warrant:

a) Properties which are the subject of the offense;

b) Stolen, embezzled proceeds, or fruits of the offense; and

c) Objects including weapons, equipment, and other items used or intended to be used as the means of committing an offense.

2) Objects that are illegal per se, even if not particularly described in the search warrant, may be seized under the plain view doctrine.

b. Validity of Search Warrant

1) The warrant shall be valid for ten days from date of issuance and may be served at any day within the said period. Thereafter, it shall be void.

2) If, in the implementation of the search warrant, its object or purpose cannot be accomplished in one day, the search shall be continued without let up even if it exceeds one day or more until completed, provided it is still within the ten-day validity period of the search warrant.

3) If the object or purpose of the search warrant cannot be accomplished within the ten-day validity period, the responsible police officer conducting the search must file, before the issuing court, an application for the extension of the validity period of said search warrant.

c. Time of Search

     The warrant should be served during daytime, unless there is a provision in the warrant allowing service at any time of the day or night.




d. Applications for Search Warrant

     All approved applications shall be recorded in a logbook, duly maintained for the purpose, indicating the name of the applicant, name of the respondent, nature of the offense, and date of the application as required in the "Application for Search Warrant", "Joint Affidavit", and Deposition of Witness (Annexes "O", "O-1" and "O-2").

1) Contents of the Application:

     All applications for Search Warrant shall be approved for filing by the Chief of Office.

The application shall indicate the following data:

a) Office applying for the Search Warrant;

b) Name of officer-applicant;

c) Name of the subject, if known;

d) Exact address/place(s) to be searched;

e) Specific statement of things/articles to be seized; and

f) Sketch and/or Picture, if available, of the place to be searched.

g) The availability or unavailability of BWCs to be used in the execution of the warrant. In case of unavailability, request for authority to use ARDs.

e. Authority of Police Officers when Conducting Search

    The authority of the police officer in the conduct of search generally emanates from the Search Warrant issued by the court. In warrantless searches, there should always be a prior valid arrest.

    In the conduct of search, if after giving notice of his/her purpose and authority, the police officer is refused admittance to the place of search, he may break open any outer or inner door or window or any part of a house or




anything therein to implement the warrant or liberate himself/herself or any person lawfully aiding him/her when unlawfully detained therein.

f. Use of BWC During the Search

1) At least one BWC and one ARD or such number as may be necessary to capture and record the relevant incidents during its execution shall be worn by members of the searching team. If BWCs are not available, at least two ARDs must be used.

2) The member of the searching team with the device shall ensure that they are worn in a conspicuous location and in a manner that maximizes their ability to capture a recording of the search.

3) The BWCs/ARDs shall be activated upon arrival at the place of search, and shall not be deactivated until the search has been fully concluded and the searching team have left the premises and returned to the police station.

g. Notification During the Search. When conducting search by virtue of a warrant, the PNP personnel wearing the BWC/ARD shall, as early as practicable, notify the lawful occupants of the premises to be searched that the execution of the SW is being recorded and that the conduct of search is pursuant to a warrant issued by the court.

h. Prohibited Acts in the Conduct of Search by Virtue of a Search Warrant

1) Houses, rooms, or other premises shall not be searched except in the presence of the lawful occupant thereof or any member of his/her family or, in the absence of the latter, in the presence of two witnesses of sufficient age and discretion residing in the same locality.

2) Lawful personal properties, papers, and other valuables not specifically indicated or particularly described in the search warrant shall not be taken.

i. Inventory and Delivery of Property Seized

1) The police officer who confiscates property under the warrant shall
issue a detailed receipt of property seized to the lawful occupant




of the premises. In the absence of such occupant, the detailed receipt shall be left in the place in which he/she found the seized property in the presence of at least two witnesses of sufficient age and discretion residing in the same locality (The Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure, rule 126 sec. 11);

2) The receipt shall likewise include items seized under the Plain
View Doctrine;

3) The police officer must then leave a duplicate detailed receipt with any barangay official having jurisdiction over the place searched following the "Receipt for Property Seized" and "Certification of Orderly Search" (Annexes "P" and "P-1"); and

4) The police officer must make a return of the search warrant and forthwith deliver the property seized to the judge who issued the warrant, together with an inventory thereof, duly verified under oath following the forms on "Compliance/Return of Search Warrant" and "Verification" (Annexes "Q" and "Q-1").

j. Downloading of Data from the BWC/ARD:

1) After the conduct of search, all recordings from the BWC/ARD shall be turned-over to the Data Custodian who shall undertake the following:

a) Receive, have custody, download within 24 hours from the recording, store to an external media storage device and encrypt all recordings of BWCs/ARDs in the conduct of search and simultaneously deposit the same in a sealed package with the issuing court. This shall include recordings captured by media representatives relative to Section 21 of RA 9165, as amended;

b) Ensure the security, confidentiality and integrity of the recordings;

c) Redact sensitive information, images and other personal identifiers from the recordings, such as in cases involving minors, sexual offenses, or domestic violence. Submit all redacted and unredacted file/s to the court;




d) Ensure that no tampering is done during the downloading process. Consequently, allow the subjects of the recordings or their counsels to witness the downloading of the recordings from the BWCs/ARDs prior to safekeeping;

e) Preserve	the	metadata	contained	in	the	BWC/ARD
recordings;

f) Limit viewing access of the footage to:

(1) Any person who is a subject of the recording or his/her
counsel;

(2) The parent, guardian, or counsel of any minor who is a
subject of the recording;

(3) The spouse, next of kin, or legally authorized designee of a deceased subject of the recording, or his/her counsel; and

(4) PNP personnel whose camera captured the recording
belongs;

g) Provide a copy of the recording to the persons enumerated in items f) (1) to (3) above should the person subject of the recording consented to its use in a court proceeding, and if the request is done within five days from data downloading.

k. Affidavit of Search and Submission of Recordings to Court

1) Upon filing of the Return, all recordings from the BWCs/ARDs used during the execution of the SW shall be stored in an external media storage device and simultaneously deposited in a sealed package with the issuing court.

2) In case of redaction of personal identifiers in the recordings, both the redacted and unredacted files shall be submitted to the court.

3) The Return shall be accompanied by affidavits of the searching team members whose BWCs/ARDs were used to capture the recordings, and shall state the following:




a) The date, time, and place of the recording;

b) The manner by which the recording was taken and stored, and when applicable, the fact of unavailability of BWCs and that a resort to ARDs was necessary, and the circumstances detailing the non-activation, interruption, or sudden termination of the recording;

c) The fact that persons of the recording were notified of the use of BWCs/ARDs;

d) The date, time, place and other circumstances surrounding the first instance of retrieval or download of the recording from the cameras;

e) The names and positions of the persons who had possession of and access to the recordings, including details of such access, from the time of their taking until their deposit with the court;

f) The fact of redaction of personal identifiers appearing in the recording whenever applicable, the special circumstances justifying such redaction, and the details redacted;

g) Whenever applicable, a certification that both unredacted and redacted files containing the recordings are submitted to the court;

h) The names and positions of the officers who will be delivering the recordings to the court;

i) Reasonable ground in case of noncompliance with any of the requirements on the use of BWCs/ARDs, including all acts undertaken showing genuine and sufficient efforts exerted to ensure compliance thereof.

4) In case of death, physical disability, resignation, or separation/ dismissal of the PNP personnel from the service whose BWCs/ ARDs were used in the execution of the warrant, any member of the arresting/searching team shall make the affidavit.




5) When death results from the execution of search warrant, an incident report detailing the search, the reasons why such death occurred, the result of related inquest proceedings, if any - including possibly those against the PNP personnel causing the death - together with other relevant documents, shall likewise be submitted.

l. Valid Search and Seizures Without Search Warrant

1) Search Made Incidental to a Valid Arrest. A person lawfully arrested may be searched for dangerous weapons or anything which may be used, or which may constitute proof in the commission of an offense, without a search warrant (The Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure, rule 126 sec. 13). The warrantless search and seizure as an incident to a lawful arrest may extend beyond the person of the arrested to include the premises or surroundings under his/her immediate control.

2) Search of Moving Vehicles. If the police officers who will conduct the search have reasonable or probable cause to believe, before the search, that either the motorist is a law offender or they will find the instrumentality or evidence pertaining to a crime in the vehicle to be searched, the vehicle may be stopped and subjected to an extensive search.

3) Seizure Of Evidence in Plain View. Any object in the plain view is subject to seizure and may be introduced as evidence. Requirements under the Plain View Doctrine are:

a) The police officer must have prior justification for an intrusion or, otherwise, must be in a position from which he/she can view a particular area;

b) The discovery of the evidence in plain view is unintentional;
and

c) It is immediately apparent to the police officer that the item he/she observes may be evidence of a crime, contraband, or is a valid subject of seizure.




4) When there is a Waiver of Right or there is Consented Search. To constitute a waiver of this constitutional right, it must appear, first, that the right exists; second, that the person involved had knowledge, either actual or constructive, of the existence of such right; that said person had an actual intention to relinquish the right ("G.R. No. L-45950", 1938).

5) Searches Under Stop and Frisk Rule. The police officer has the right to stop a citizen, interrogate him/her, and pat him/her for weapons whenever he/she has genuine reason to believe, based on experiences and the particular circumstances that a criminal activity may be afoot.

6) Emergency and Exigent Circumstances. A search warrant could be validly dispensed with in cases of exigent and emergency situation, and the police officers have reasonable grounds to believe that a crime is being committed, and they have no opportunity to apply for a search warrant from the courts because the latter were closed.

2.8 Rules on Anti-Illegal Drugs Operations

a. General Policy and Guidelines:

1) The Philippine Drug Enforcement Agency (PDEA) is mandated by law to carry out the provisions of Comprehensive Dangerous Drugs Act of 2002 (RA 9165), as amended by RA 10640. It serves as the implementing arm of the Dangerous Drugs Board (DDB), and responsible for the efficient and effective enforcement of all the provisions of the aforementioned act on any dangerous drug and/or controlled precursor and essential chemicals (CPECs).

2) Only PNP Drug Enforcement Group Special Operation Units (PDEG SOUs) and Drug Enforcement Units (DEUs) of LPUs are authorized to conduct Anti-Illegal Drug Operations and to coordinate with PDEA.

3) All other operating units are only allowed as support in the conduct of joint operations with PDEG and/or the concerned DEUs.

4) The PNP is not prevented from conducting warrantless arrests in relation to violations of RA 9165 as amended under Section 5,




Rule 113, and search incidental to a lawful arrest under Section 13, Rule 126 of the Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure.

5) Information concerning parcels containing dangerous drugs, CPECs and drug paraphernalia shall be reported to PDEA, through the Inter-Agency Drug Interdiction Task Group. The PNP shall provide the necessary support and assistance to the task group, if required.

b. Coordination Requirements

1) Prior to the conduct of all anti-illegal drug operations, PNP anti- drug units shall coordinate with PDEA Regional Operation Center (ROC), and the LPU having jurisdiction over the area of operation. Coordination shall be made personally with PDEA ROC to secure a Certificate of Coordination (COC);

2) PDEA anti-illegal drug operations shall be coordinated with the concerned LPU, prior the conduct of operation. The PDEA's Pre- Operation Report and Coordination Form (Annexes "R" and "S") shall be received and stamped by the Duty Officer of the LPU indicating his/her name, signature, time and day of coordination;

3) All operating units shall furnish the concerned LPU a copy of the After-Operation Report immediately after the termination of every anti-illegal drug operation;

4) There shall only be one COC for every anti-illegal drug operation following the "One-Jurisdiction, One-Operation" rule, wherein only one anti-illegal drug operation against a particular suspect/s covering a specific area at a given time shall be conducted;

5) Copies of reports pertaining to other police operations that resulted in the arrest of a person/s and/or seizure/confiscation of dangerous drugs, CPECs and drug paraphernalia shall be furnished to PDEA for record purposes;

6) The PDEG SOUs may conduct anti-illegal drug operations nationwide, even in areas where there is an ongoing anti-illegal drug operation, provided that the area of operation is specifically




identified, and details shall be provided in the Pre-Operation Report and a Coordination Form;

7) In instances that the operating PDEG SOUs and DEUs shall move to another area not mentioned in the COC, a new Pre-Operation Report and Coordination Form shall be submitted to PDEA. When personal coordination cannot be made, an online submission of requirement for application for issuance of COC is permitted. Only the control number shall be submitted after the operation in exchange for the original COC, provided that the principle of "One- Jurisdiction, One-Operation" rule shall apply; and

8) The PNP shall at all times submit to PDEA ROC copies of operational reports such as Spot Report, Negative Operation Report and Progress Report after the conduct of any anti-illegal drug operation.

c. Handling, Custody and Disposition of Drug and Non-Drug Evidence (DOJ, 2020).

    During the handling, custody and disposition of evidence, the provisions of Section 21, R.A. No. 9165 and its IRR as amended by R.A. No. 10640 shall be strictly observed. Noncompliance, under justifiable grounds, with the requirements of Section 21 (1) of R.A. no. 9165, as amended, shall not render void, and invalid such seizures and custody over the items provided the integrity and the evidentiary value of the seized items are properly preserved by the apprehending officer/team. Any justification or explanation in cases of noncompliance with the said requirements, shall be clearly stated in the sworn statements/affidavits of the apprehending arresting/ seizing officers, as well as the steps taken to preserve the integrity and evidentiary value of the seized/confiscated items. Photographs of pieces of evidence must be taken immediately upon discovery of such, including the process of recording the inventory in the presence of required witnesses. The seizing officer must mark all the evidence seized with his/her initials and signature as well as the date when the evidence was found/recovered or seized, numbered consecutively.

1) Drug Evidence

a) Upon seizure or confiscation of dangerous drugs or CPECs,
laboratory equipment, apparatus and paraphernalia, the




operating unit's seizing officer/inventory officer must conduct the photographing, marking and physical inventory in the place of operation in the presence of:

(1) The suspect/s or the person/s from whom such items were confiscated and/or seized or his/ her representative or counsel;

(2) An elected public official; and

(3) Representative from the National Prosecution Service (NPS) or media, who shall affix their signatures and who shall be given copies of the inventory. The Chain of Custody Form for Drug Evidence, Non-Drug Evidence and for Laboratory (Annex "T", "U" and "V"), whichever is applicable, shall also be accomplished together with the Certificate of Inventory of Seized Items (Annex "W").

b) For seized or recovered drugs covered by search warrants, the photographing, marking and inventory must be done in the place where the search warrant was served.

c) For warrantless seizures like buy-bust operations, the photographing, markings, and physical inventory must be done at the place of apprehension, unless for justifiable reasons, the photographing, markings, and physical inventory may be made at the nearest police station or office of the apprehending officer or team, ensuring that the integrity and evidentiary value of the seized items remain intact and preserved. Such justification or explanation as well as the steps taken to preserve the integrity and evidentiary value of the seized/confiscated items shall be clearly stated in a sworn affidavit of justification/explanation of the apprehending/ seizing officers.

d) In cases when the execution of search warrant is preceded by warrantless seizures, the photographing, marking, and inventory of the items recovered from the search warrant shall be performed distinctly and separately from the photographing, marking, and inventory of the items seized from warrantless seizures.




e) In case of seizure of plant sources at the plantation site, where it is not physically possible to count or weigh as a complete entity, the seizing officer shall estimate its count or gross weight, as the case may be. If it is safe and practicable, the photographing, marking and inventory of the seized plant sources may be performed at the plantation site. Representative samples of prescribed quantity pursuant to DDB Board Regulation No. 1, series of 2002, as amended, and/or DDB Board Regulation No. 1, series of 2007, as amended, shall be taken from the site after the seizure for laboratory examination, and retained for presentation as the corpus delicti of the seized/confiscated plant sources following the chain of custody of evidence.

f) Whenever necessary, the dangerous drugs and/or CPECs seized shall be properly packed, sealed and marked with the initials and signature of the seizing officer as well as the date when the evidence was found/recovered or seized, numbered consecutively

g) Within the same period, the seizing or inventory officer shall prepare an Inventory Sheet which shall include but not limited to the following:

(1) Time, date and place of occurrence/seizure.

(2) Identity of person/s arrested.

(3) Identity of the seizing officer and all persons who witnessed the marking and inventory;

(4) Type of operation (e.g. warrantless seizure, buy-bust, etc.)

(5) Description of the vehicle, vessel, place or person searched from where/whom the substance was found.

(6) Description of packaging, seals and other identifying marks.

(7) Quantity of the seized items.




(8) Description of the substance found

h) As far as practicable, all seized dangerous drugs and/or CPECs shall be immediately submitted to the PNP Crime Laboratory (CL) for examination and proper disposition.

i) Upon submission of the drug evidence to the PNP CL for examination, all the phases of turn-over of evidence must have corresponding receipts to show continuance of chain of custody.

2) Non-Drug Evidence (to be covered in a separate inventory sheet and chain of custody form)

a) The following pieces of non-drug evidence shall be photographed, marked and inventoried:

(1) Buy-bust/marked money, if applicable.

(2) For motor vehicles and other forms of transportation (e.g. vessel/banca, bicycle, airplane): plate number/ conduction sticker number, color, model, make and type and description.

(3) For firearms: serial number, model, make and caliber,
kind and type.

(4) For explosives (after observing safety protocol from EOD unit): description and type.

(5) For other deadly weapons (e.g. knives): description, measurement, quantity.

(6) For smaller pieces of evidence (e.g. ammunition): pertinent information such as quality, quantity and place where it was seized/recovered.

b) For digital evidence such as computers, cell phones, laptops, other similar gadgets, and storage peripherals (e.g. flash drives, cd) the same shall likewise be photographed, marked and inventoried;




c) For documentary evidence, same procedure regarding
photographs, marking, and inventory shall be followed; and

d) For motor vehicles, vessel/banca, firearms and digital evidence, the same are subject to verification and processing by the LTO, Firearms and Explosive Division (FED) and Anti- Cybercrime Group (ACG), and MG as the case may be.

3) Chain of Custody

a) To ensure the preservation of the integrity and identity of the drug evidence, the chain of custody form shall indicate:

(1) The time and place of the search;

(2) The names of the officers who marked, inventoried and sealed the seized items;

(3) Location of the evidence at the time it was found. If the same was seized from an individual, it should note exactly where on the person the evidence was found (e.g. right front pocket);

(4) Type of operation for which the evidence was obtained (e.g. evidence of a sale, implementation of search warrant);

(5) Item numbers of the seized items in numerical sequence
consistent with the inventory sheet;

(6) Detailed description of the article at the time it was seized.

(7) Names of officers who took custody and in what capacity they received the evidence from one officer to another within the chain; and

(8) Time and date every time the transfer of custody of the same evidence were made in the course of safekeeping until submitted to laboratory personnel for forensic laboratory examination and presentation in court.




b) The receipt of evidence must be acknowledged by all officers receiving the evidence, whether in the same or a separate document. Such receipt shall form part of the case folder of the transmitting unit.

c) The evidence custodian, when applicable, must maintain a logbook that contains information on:

(1) The person who turned in the evidence for safekeeping;

(2) The date and time thereof;

(3) The person who received it;

(4) The person who requested the same for whatever purpose, who shall affix his/her name, signature, date and time in the logbook.

     When a piece of evidence is turned in, the custodian should check the identification mark on the piece of evidence to ensure that it is the same item and determine that the item is in the same condition as when it was discovered. Any change in the physical appearance of the evidence should be noted and recorded.


2.9 Rules on Anti-Kidnapping Operations. The Anti-Kidnapping Group (AKG) is the PNP's lead unit in the conduct of anti-kidnapping operations in close coordination with the LPU, other law enforcement agencies and the community (Annex "X").

a. Types of Kidnapping

1) Kidnapping by Organized Crime Group (OCG)/Criminal Group (CG)

2) Kidnapping by Terrorists Groups (TG)

3) Kidnapping by Other Individuals




b. Concept of Operation

     Upon receipt of the kidnapping incident report at the police station, the Desk Officer shall record the same in the blotter book. The COP and the investigator shall immediately make an initial assessment of the reported incident.

     If the initial assessment has been confirmed that it is indeed a kidnapping incident, the case shall be referred to the AKG, otherwise, the incident shall be handled by the concerned LPU.

     AKG will form an evaluation team composed of members of the quad staff and duty officer of the day. They will assess and evaluate the complaint to determine the appropriate operational response.

1) Kidnapping by Organized Crime Group/Criminal Group

a) If it is assessed as a kidnapping incident by OCGs/CG, AKG will immediately activate the Anti-Kidnapping Action Team (AKAT) which will handle the investigation, negotiation, operation and intelligence aspect of the case.

b) The AKAT shall be supported by the concerned LPU and other units.

c) The AKAT will only be deactivated when the victim is rescued
and a case is filed.

2) Kidnapping by Terrorists Groups

a) If the case is assessed as a kidnapping perpetrated by TGs, AKG will request for the activation of the Critical Incident Management Task Group (CIMTG). In case the Joint PNP- AFP Task force or Crisis Management Committee (CMC), as the case maybe, is activated the PNP shall provide full support and cooperation.

b) If the incident happens in Mindanao involving local TGs, the Special Task Force (STF) will be activated with the Deputy Director of the concerned DIPO as the STF head. The STF




shall serve as the primary intelligence and operational arm of the PNP against KFR groups operating in Mindanao. It shall establish coordinative line with the CMC.

3) Kidnapping by Other Individuals

a) If the alleged kidnapping incident, which is not within the AKG's mandate, is perpetrated by other individuals, the concerned LPU shall take the appropriate operational response. Otherwise, the AKG shall take cognizance of the incident and handle it accordingly.

b) If the kidnapping incident involves a foreign national as victim, the following shall be undertaken:

(1) By Local Police Unit:

(a) Determine the nationality and other personal
circumstances of the foreign kidnapped victim;

(b) Establish the identity and the relationship of the
reportee to the kidnapped victim;

(c) Notify the Bureau of Immigration (BI) and his/her embassy/consulate office, as the case maybe, and request said office to provide assistance to their citizen like interpreters for non-English speaking complainants, consular assistance etc; and

(d) Make a thorough assessment and determine if the complaint falls under the category of a Kidnap- for-Ransom (KFR) case and refer it to the AKG if validated;

(2) By AKG:

(a) Record all complaints referred by other PNP units, Office of the CPNP and other law enforcement agencies at the complaint section. The complaint will be attended by the Initial Assessment Team;




(b) Require the complainant to show proof of identity during the initial assessment and properly record the documents presented;

(c) Assist the complainant to secure the required documents from his/her embassy if the required documents are missing; and

(d) Inform the embassy of the victim and request their assistance.

2.10 Cybercrime and Cyber-Related Incident Response Operations

a. Cybercrime Response. Cybercrime Response is the actual police intervention in a cybercrime or cyber-related incident where the acquisition of matters of evidentiary value is traceable within the computer's hardware, software and its network.

b. Guidelines in Responding to Cybercrime and Cyber-Related Incidents

1) When responding to a cybercrime incident, or to a crime scene where Information and Communication Technology (ICT) equipment (e.g computers, digital storage devices and other electronic devices or equipment) are present, it is imperative for the First Responder (FR) to protect and preserve the crime scene and seek the assistance of the station IOC to identify potential evidence such as the following:

a) Contraband or fruits of a crime;

b) Tools used for the commission of the crime; and/or

c) Other items that may be used in the commission of the crime.

2) The FR shall immediately coordinate with the nearest ACG office, through the station TOC or the IOC, for assistance. Upon arrival of the ACG personnel, they shall immediately conduct the "bag and tag" procedure on the digital evidence and turn over to the IOC.

3) The concerned investigating unit shall secure and submit a court




order and necessary legal requirements for the ACG to conduct digital forensic examination that is in accordance with the rule on cybercrime warrants. The evidence seized shall then be subjected to digital forensic examination by the PNP ACG. The result of the forensic examination, as well as the testimony of the forensic expert, shall be made available during the trial.

c. Preservation of Seized Computer

    Upon determination of how the computer was utilized in the commission of the crime, and once the legal requirements have been complied with, the following are the guidelines in the preservation of the seized computer:

1) Secure the Scene

a) Officer's safety is always paramount.

b) Preserve the area for potential fingerprints.

c) Immediately restrict access to the computer.

d) Disable the internet connection to restrict remote access to the computer

2) Secure the computer as evidence

a) If the computer is "OFF", do not turn it "ON".

b) If the computer is "ON", do not turn it "OFF", nor touch its
mouse or its keyboard.

3) For stand-alone connection or single area connection computers (non-networked)

a) Consult a Digital Forensic Examiner.

b) If a Digital Forensic Examiner is not available, the station IOC shall perform the following:

(1) Photograph screen and disconnect all power sources
and plugs including those at the back of the computer;




(2) Cover or put a tape over each drive slot;

(3) Photograph (or make a diagram) and label parts located
at the back of the computer including its connections;

(4) Label all connectors and cable end to allow reassembly as needed (Example: "Socket" marked "A" and the "cable End" also marked "A");

(5) If transport is required, pack the components as "fragile
cargo" prior to transport;

(6) Keep it away from magnets, radio transmitters, and
from other hostile environment; and

(7) Ensure that only the Digital Forensic Examiner conducts the search for any evidence contained in the computer hardware;

4) For Networked Computers (or business computers)

a) Consult a Digital Forensic Examiner for assistance.

b) Do not immediately pull the plug to prevent the following:

(1) Severe damage to the system;

(2) Disrupting the legitimate business; and

(3) Possible liability of the police officers.

5) For Ransomware or Malware Attack on a Computer

a) Consult a computer specialist for assistance;

b) Immediately disconnect the computer from the network to avoid the spread of malware to other computers on the same network; and

c) Do not immediately pull the plug and wait for the computer specialist to arrive.




d. Guidelines in the Treatment of Other Electronic Data Storage Devices

     The IOC should understand that other electronic devices may contain viable evidence associated with the crime. The IOC must ensure that the device should not be accessed unless a warrant has been issued.

e. Preservation of Seized Mobile Communication Devices

     Upon determination of how the mobile communication device was utilized in the commission of the crime the following are the guidelines to be followed:

1) If the device is turned "ON", do not turn it "OFF" as it could activate
lockout feature

a) Take a photograph of the screen display and write down all
information therein;

b) If possible, turn on airplane/flight mode or use a signal blocking container, if available, and record the steps undertaken;

c) If the device is locked, do not attempt to unlock it; and

d) Bring the power supply cord of the seized device found at the scene.

2) If the device is TURNED "OFF", leave it "OFF" AS IT could alter
evidence in the device.

f. Preservation of Seized Facsimile or Fax Machine or Similar Devices

     If the fax machine is "ON", do not turn it "OFF" as it may cause the loss of the last number dialed or other stored fax numbers. If possible, all manuals should be seized along with the machine. Photographs of the machine and its display shall be taken.

g. Preservation of Seized Caller ID Devices and Other Similar Devices

1) The IOC should be able to recognize potential evidence contained in caller ID devices such as telephone numbers and subscriber's information from incoming phone calls.




2) The IOC should remember that interruption of the power supply of the caller ID device may cause loss of data if not protected by an internal battery back-up.

h. Guidelines in the Treatment of Seized Digital Video Recording (DVR) Devices

1) The IOC should be able to recognize potential evidence contained in DVR devices such as the date and time of occurrence and the persons viewed on the video captured by the Audio and Video Recorder (AVR) and camera devices; and

2) The IOC should secure a warrant for the conduct of forensic examination/enhancement of audio video recorded by the DVR device.

i. Acquiring the DVR Devices and/or their Footages/Recording

1) The IOC shall send a Preservation Letter (Annex "Y") addressed to the DVR device owner directing him/her to keep, retain and preserve the footages/recordings; and

2) A court order or a notarized affidavit of consent together with the photocopy of valid ID from the DVR device owner or authorized administrator must be secured to obtain the original and/or duplicate copies of footages/recordings.



Rule 3 Internal Security Operations


      The PNP shall provide active support to the AFP in Internal Security Operations (ISO) for the suppression of the TGs and other serious threats to national security. In the conduct of ISO, the PNP quad concept shall be integrated and applied.




3.1 The PNP in an Active Support Role

The PNP shall perform the following:

a. In white areas of operation, the PNP may assume the lead role in ISO against the TGs, other threats to national security and OCGs engaged in armed offensives. In red areas of operation, the AFP will assume the lead role (AFP-PNP JLD No.3, 2020);

b. Coordination with the territorial AFP and other uniformed services must be made in writing before the conduct of ISO. However, in justifiable circumstances, electronic means may be allowed;

c. Specific areas where atrocities initiated by the TG occurred, such as but not limited to ambush, harassment, arson, raid, liquidation and bombing, shall be treated as a crime scene. The LPU shall conduct the Crime Scene Investigation (CSI); and

d. Specific areas where armed encounters occurred shall likewise be investigated by the LPU for purposes of evidence and intelligence gathering.

3.2 Law Enforcement Operations Against Terrorist Groups and other Threats to National Security.

      The PNP shall take the lead role in the conduct of sustained law enforcement operations against TGs and other threats to national security to include but not limited to the service of warrant of arrest, implementation of search warrant, entrapment, and hot pursuit.

      In the conduct of law enforcement operations in Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF) areas/communities identified by the Ad Hoc Joint Action Group (AHJAG), coordination with the latter shall be made by the implementing/operating PNP Unit Commander.

3.3 Target Hardening.

Police stations, patrol bases of mobile forces and established checkpoints,
especially those located in far-flung areas, are prone to attacks. As such, security




measures to prevent atrocities of terrorist groups must be undertaken such as but not limited to:

a. Conduct of security survey and inspection to assess defense viability;

b. Strengthen  physical  security  measures  and  defense  to  prevent
unauthorized access;

c. Develop security consciousness among personnel through education
and training;

d. Conduct regular Red Teaming Operations to check and provide solutions
to identified gaps in the security plan;

e. Conduct community organization and mobilization activities to encourage the community to immediately report the presence and plans of TGs;

f. Internalize and put into practice the 11 General Orders of a Duty Guard. (Annex "Z") Likewise, personnel on duty shall always carry issued long firearms and ammunition rig/bandoliers with basic load and wear bulletproof vest;

g. Whenever there is an arrested individual identified to be a member or associated with TGs, a mandatory DNA collection sample should be taken from the arrested individual upon request of the arresting police unit to the PNP CL in support to investigation and as part of the record/ database of the PNP for future investigation/intelligence operations; and

h. Regularly conduct simulation exercise on camp defense to improve operational readiness of PNP personnel and capabilities.




Rule 4 Public Safety Operations


4.1 PNP Critical Incident Management Operational Procedures (CIMOP)

      As a matter of policy, human-induced (man-made) critical incidents are the responsibilities of the National and Local Peace and Order Council (NPOC) while natural calamities and disasters are the responsibilities of the National and Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council (NDRRMC). Lower-level organizations of the NPOC and NDRRMC take cognizance of the responsibilities ascribed in their national organization. The PNP, being at the forefront of crisis situations, must play an active role by organizing its own Critical Incident Management Committee (CIMC) to support the NPOC and NDRRMC.

      The Crisis Management Committee (CMC) is primarily concerned with the formulation of crisis management procedures, integration and orchestration of government, military/police and public efforts towards the prevention and control of crisis incidents. All actions and decisions taken by the CMC shall be within the policies laid down by the corresponding Peace and Order Councils (POCs).

      The National POC (NPOC) chaired by the Secretary of Interior and Local Government (SILG) is tasked to contribute to the strategies of the National Security Council, coordinate and monitor, and serve as a forum for deliberation for peace and order concerns. This Council outlines its roles and responsibilities to threats to peace and order.

      The Incident Command System (ICS) shall be adopted as a template in responding to critical incidents. This provides guidance to the PNP's roles on how to organize its assets to respond to an incident and processes to manage the response through its successive stages.

a. Types of Critical Incidents

    PNP Incident Management Operations complement the Peace and Order Councils (POCs) - CMCs and DRRMC from the National, Regional, Provincial, City and Municipal levels. The procedures under this Rule shall be observed by all PNP Units/Offices with respect to their roles in addressing human induced incidents and police responses to natural calamity and disaster (PNP MC 2013-021 "PNP Critical Incident Management Operational Procedures").




1) Natural Calamity and Disaster. In the event of natural calamity and disaster, the PNP shall act as the first responder in the affected area in order to provide area security and support in the conduct of search, rescue and retrieval operations to be spearheaded by the area DRRMCs.

2) Human Induced Incidents. In the event of human induced incidents,
the PNP shall respond to two different situations:

a) To manage an incident that could be resolved by ordinary police response without the involvement of the Crisis Management Committee (CMC);

b) To manage an incident that needs a CMC-directed operation requiring the implementation of special tasks by one or more of the urgent services of the Philippine government.

     Both actions of the PNP in either situation follow the ICS operational procedures.

    All actions of the PNP in addressing these critical incidents are in support to the POC - CMCs and DRRMCs with common objectives of saving lives and properties, resolution of the critical incidents at the earliest possible time, and restoration of normalcy in the affected areas.

    Based on the National Crisis Management Core Manual series of 2012, the National Crisis Management Framework provides a comprehensive approach to understand the components of a crisis or the 5Ps of Crisis Management: Predict, Prevent, Prepare, Perform and Post-Action and Assessment (Annex "AA").

b. Stages in Disaster Management

1) Pre - Disaster Stage - Pro-active Assessment. When there is no disaster or calamity:

a) Risk Mapping and identification of disaster-prone areas;

b) Identification of staging areas, evacuation routes and evacuation centers;




c) Disaster response drills, simulation exercises and trainings
for flood, earthquake, fire etc;

d) Meeting of regular Task Groups and Sub-Task Groups together with respective levels of the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Councils;

e) Capability audit (manpower, machines, materials, money
and methods);

f) Awareness campaign through TRIMP; and

g) Community mobilization activities such as but not limited to:

(1) Sewerage clean-up;

(2) De-clogging of waterways, canals, esteros; and

(3) Clearing of unauthorized structures in disaster prone areas.

2) Disaster Response Stage - Disaster Incident Management (Level 2 - Red). When there is an impending natural calamity or when an unexpected human-induced incident and natural calamity occur:

a) Natural Calamity

(1) Activation  of  Disaster  Incident  Management  Task
Groups (DIMTG);

(2) Coordination with NDRRMC to support its disaster
response;

(3) Employment of alarm and warning systems such as the use of police sirens and other portable warning systems capable of producing loud wailing sound;

(4) Pre-emptive evacuation of residents in affected areas in coordination with concerned government agencies; and




(5) Provision of security in calamity area and support search, rescue and retrieval operation, evacuation and emergency medical services in coordination with concerned DRRMC.

b) Human Induced Incident

(1) Activation of Critical Incident Management Task Group
(CIMTG);

(2) Coordination with NPOC-CMC or its equivalent to
support its crisis response;

(3) Evacuation of residents in the crisis area in coordination
with concerned government agencies; and

(4) Provision of security in crisis area and support search, rescue and retrieval operation, evacuation and emergency medical services in coordination with concerned agencies.

3) Post-Disaster Stage - Support to Recovery and Rehabilitation
Efforts (Level 3- White).

a) Acquisition of Rapid Damage Assessment and Needs Analysis (RDANA) reports from concerned Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council of the affected areas;

b) Deployment of personnel for relief operations;

c) Provision of security and traffic assistance to returning evacuees;

d) Submission of After Disaster Response Report to the C, PNP
copy furnished DRRMC; and

e) Deactivation of the DIMTG/ CIMTG when the situation is already manageable in disaster-stricken area.

     In the Management of the Dead and Missing Persons (MDM) the PNP CL shall take the lead in identifying the remains of victims during




and after human-induced disasters, while the NBI shall take the lead in
the identification of remains of victims during and after a natural calamity.

c. Alert Levels During Human-Induced Critical Incident. Terrorism and threat group alert level shall be disseminated by TDI to all concerned offices based on the information provided by NICA.

1) Level 1 (Low) - There is no information to suggest a specific
human-induced critical incident may occur.

2) Level 2 (Moderate) -Human-induced critical incident is possible, but not likely.

3) Level 3 (High) - There is a strong possibility that human-induced critical incident may occur within a short period of time.

4) Level 4 (Extreme) - A human-induced critical incident has just
occurred or has just been pre-empted;

d. Incident Command System (ICS). The ICS, provided under National Crisis Management Core Manual, is structured on six major functional areas: Command, Operations, Planning, Logistics, Finance, Administration, and Intelligence/Investigation as an optional seventh functional area that is activated on a case-to-case basis. (Annex "BB").

    On the enactment of Republic Act (RA) 10121, otherwise known as the Philippine Disaster Risk Reduction and Management (DRRM) Law, on May 27 2010, the Philippine government took a proactive approach to manage the disaster consequences and reduce disaster risks by institutionalizing various mechanisms. Among these is the ICS.

    ICS is one of the flagship programs of the Office of the Office of the Civil Defense (OCD). As provided for in RA 10121, the NDRRMC Memorandum Circular No. 4 s 2012 and the Executive Order No. 82 s 2012, ICS has been institutionalized as an on-scene, all-hazard incident management concept introduced by the US Forest Service that can be used by all DRRM Councils, emergency management and response agencies. It is a disaster response tool that coordinates the actions of all response groups.

    ICS has been proven effective in managing potential and actual disaster consequences. It has significantly enhanced the mechanism for resource




management, reporting and documentation, promotion of responder safety, and optimum achievement of response objectives as evident in past major disaster response operations to include management of planned high- density population gatherings.

e. Organization and Structure of CIMC/CIMTG/DIMTG

    In accordance with Executive Order NO. 82, series of 2012, CMCs shall be established at all levels specifically to take decisive action in responding to and managing human-induced crisis.

    The local CMC, headed by the local chief executive as the responsible officer (RO), designates the Incident Commander (IC) whenever a particular crisis occurs. If the LPU commander is designated as the IC, the CIMTG shall be immediately activated to support the CMC.

1) The Crisis Management Committee (CMC)

     The CMC (Annex "CC") is primarily concerned with the formulation of crisis management procedures, integration and orchestration of government, military/police and public efforts towards the prevention and control of crisis incidents. All actions and decisions taken by the CMC shall be within the policies laid down by the corresponding POCs.

2) The PNP NHQ Critical Incident Management Committee (PNP NHQ CIMC)

     In support to the mandates of CMCs, the PNP NHQ shall organize its CIMC (Annex "DD") with five sub-committees namely: sub-committee on criminality, sub-committee on destabilization, public disturbance and planned events, sub-committee on terrorism and CBRNE, sub- committee on public health hazards and sub- committee on natural disasters. This Committee shall take cognizance of all critical incidents, whether human-induced or natural disaster, and shall supervise/ oversee operations of concerned offices/units to mitigate its effects on the general populace. It is primarily concerned with the implementation of policies and orchestration of PNP's force and resources and efforts towards the control and mitigation of critical incidents. The NHQ CIMTG/ DIMTG shall also be activated and shall serve as a special operating task group of the CIMC.




3) The Critical Incident Management Task Group (CIMTG)

     To carry out the mandates of the PNP CIMC on human-induced (man-made) incidents, CIMTGs (Annexes "EE" and "EE-1") shall be organized and replicated at the PRO/NCRPO (Regional) level down to the PPO/CPO; CPS/MPS (City/Municipal) level following the ICS structure.

     The IC shall be designated by the Chairman, CMC and CIMTG to be complemented by the Officers of the Office/unit who has functional staff functions in the organization.

     At the Regional/Provincial/City/Municipal level, the PNPs response to any crisis will be to activate the CIMTG for human-induced incident and the DIMTG for natural disaster. The Regional Director/Provincial/ City Director/COP shall have the authority to activate the CIMTG or DIMTG.

The following are considered as human-induced critical incidents:

a) Abduction involving prominent personalities such as national and local government officials, foreign nationals (diplomats, ambassadors, consuls, attaches, foreign tourists), religious leaders from various religious congregations, and other personalities whose involvement in incidents may result in controversies;
b) Attacks on vital installations, communities, and prominent
personalities;
c) Jailbreaks;
d) Heinous	crimes	like	assassination,	ambush	involving
prominent personalities;
e) Robbery hold-up, armored van robbery, and bank robbery
perpetrated by syndicated groups;
f) Election -Related Violent Incident (ERV);
g) Major Events (International and National);
h) Terrorism;
i) Conflagration Incidents;
j) Major Road Accidents;
k) Mass Transport Accidents;
l) Aircraft Hijackings;




m) Sea Mishaps;
n) Bombings;
o) Indiscriminate active shooting;
p) Mass actions;
q) Mass poisoning;
r) Drone attack;
s) Gas leaks;
t) Nuclear and Radiation Accidents;
u) Chemical Disaster;
v) Biological Disaster;
w) Cyber-attacks;
x) Epidemic;
y) Pandemic;
z) Stampede;
aa) Industrial Accident;
bb) Oil spills; and
cc) Other similar human-induced critical incidents that may result in human casualties and/or mass destruction of properties and environment.

     As applicable, the following shall be designated to handle the functional responsibilities of the CIMTG depending on the level of its activation:

Incident Commander:	DRDO/DDDO/DPDO/DCDO/DCOPO Deputy Incident Commander:	RCS/CDDS/OPB/C, OPNS
Public Information Officer:	Unit C, PIO
Liaison Officer:	PCR Officer
Safety Officer:	C, RHSG/C, DHSG/PESPO/SESPO Operations /Plans Staff:	C, PL/C, PL/C, PLB/ C, OPNS Intel/Invest Staff:	C, RID/ C, DID/C, IB/IMB/C, IIS Budget and Logistics Staff:	C, RLD/C, DF/C, PLB/C, Finance

     In accordance with Executive Order 320, as amended, NPOC has constituted CMCs at all levels specifically to take decisive action in emergency situations.




4) Disaster Incident Management Task Group (DIMTG)

    A DIMTG shall also be established and shall serve as a special operating task group of the PNP Sub-Committee on Disaster Management (SCDM) and assist the PRO DIMTG as the Chairman/Task Coordinator, PNP SCDM may direct. The NHQ PNP shall be composed of the NSUs to be headed by the Director, PNP Special Action Force (SAF) as Task Group Commander with the Deputy Director of PCRG as the Deputy Task Group Commander (Annex "FF").

    DIMTGs shall also be activated at the PRO/PPO/CPO/CPS/MPS level depending on the affected area (Annex "FF-1"). As a matter of rule, a Regional DIMTG shall be activated if two or more provinces/cities are affected by disaster, a Provincial DIMTG shall be activated if two or more municipalities are affected, and a Municipal DIMTG shall be activated if two or more barangays are affected (LOI 35/10 "SAKLOLO REVISED").

The following are considered natural disaster incidents:
a) Floods;
b) Landslides;
c) Volcanic Eruption;
d) Earthquake;
e) Tidal Wave;
f) Tsunami;
g) Storm surge;
h) Forest fire;
i) Drought;
j) Meteorite impact;
k) Tornado; and
l) Other natural hazards that may lead to colossal loss of property and lives.




     As applicable, the following shall be designated to handle the functional responsibilities of the DIMTG:

Incident Commander:	 D,SAF/DRDO/DDDO/DPDO/DCDO/COP Deputy Incident Commander:	DDPCR/RCS/CDDS/D, IC/DCOP
Public Information Officer:	Unit C, PIO
Liaison Officer:	D, PCADG/C, RPCR/C, PCR/C,WCPD
Safety Officer:	D, HSS/C, RHSG/C, DHSG/PESPO/ SESPO
Operations/Plans Staff:	DDO/DDPL/ C, PLD/C, PLB/C, OPNS
Intel/Invest Staff:	DDI/DDIDM/C, RID/RIDMD/C, DID/DID- MD/C, IB/IMB/C, I&IS
Budget and Logistics Staff:	DDL/C, RLD/RCD/C, DF/LD/C, PLB/C,
FINANCE
Admin Staff:	DD, DPRM/C, RPMD/C, DPHRDD/C,
PHRDB/C, ADMIN

f. The Escalation Protocols

    The responsibility of addressing crisis can be transferred if the increasing needs in handling the incident are beyond the capability of the established CIMTG or DIMTG, or if there is jurisdictional change, when the incident moves location or area of responsibility crosses boundaries. The transfer of responsibility during a crisis must always include a transfer of command briefing which may be oral, written or combination of both.

1) Human-Induced Escalation Protocol (CIMTG). To attain a smooth transition of command responsibility, the table shows the conditions or situations in any crisis level that will be considered:




Table 3.1 Human-Induced Escalation Protocols

CIMTG Activation LevelConditions or Situations
Municipal/City	(MPS/CPS Numbered PS)a. Local PNP and Local CMC are in control of the
situation; and
b. Appropriate	resources	are	available	and capable at either Municipal or Barangay Level.



Provincial/District PPO/DPOa. Local PNP at the Municipal/City Level are unable
to resolve the crisis within their capabilities;
b. Municipal/City CMC recommends elevation of
the crisis level;
c. Situation requires employment of security forces and utilization of resources of the provincial level organization and beyond; and
d. Incident affects two or more municipalities
within the same province/district.



Regional (PRO/NCRPO)a. Situation requires employment of security forces and utilization of resources of the Regional level organizations;
b. Upon the recommendation of the Provincial
CMC;
c. Incident	involves	foreign	nationals,	either
perpetrators or victims; and
d. Incidents affects two or more provinces/districts
within the same region



National (NHQ)a. Terrorism attach resulting into mass casualties;
b. Upon recommendation of the Regional CMC;
c. Incident	involves  foreign	national/s,  either
perpetrators or victims;
d. National Security issues are at stake, such as food, water, energy, critical transportation and communication structure, and environment are threatened; and
e. Incident affects NCR, or two or more regions. However, the Task Group Commanders/RDs remains in command in their respective PROs.



2) Natural Disaster Escalation Protocol (DIMTG)

Table 3.2 Natural Disaster Escalation Protocols

DIMTG Activation LevelConditions or SituationsCPS/MPS LevelTwo or more barangays or the entire CPS/MPSPPO/CPO LevelTwo or more CPS/MPS or the entire PPO/CPOPRO LevelTwo or more Districts/PPOs/CPOs or the entire PRONHQ LevelTwo or more PROs
4.2 Hostage Situation. In handling hostage situations, the following guidelines and procedures shall be undertaken:

a. First Responders (FR)

1) Secure the incident scene and establish perimeter security.

2) Give situation update to concerned TOC and inform the Hostage Negotiation Team (HNT) for possible deployment.

3) Do not allow unauthorized persons at the incident scene.

4) Gather information about the hostage-taker and hostage(s) from witnesses.

5) Re-route traffic flow (if necessary).

6) Evacuate all persons within the vicinity of the incident scene.

7) Clear areas for use of other responders.

8) Establish Advanced Command Post (ACP).

9) Initiate contact with the hostage-taker through any available means.




10) If the situation becomes volatile, request for deployment of HNT. However, at any given time, if the hostage-taker is neutralized, the HNT may no longer be necessary.

11) Brief the TL, HNT of the situation and turn-over the conduct of negotiation.

12) Stay at the incident scene to maintain security, crowd and traffic
control, preserve evidence and take custody of witnesses.

b. Incident Commander (IC)

     There shall be only one IC holding at least a senior rank and/or one with experience in hostage/crisis situation or relative training. Until such time that he/she officially designates a spokesperson, he/she may issue appropriate press statements and continue to perform the role of the spokesperson.

1) The IC shall, upon assessment of the situation, prepare necessary plans including but not limited to the following:

a) Emergency Response Plan - depends on the threat posed by the hostage-takers and need of the HNT and IC.

b) Breakout Plan - possibility of breakout shall be considered immediately upon drawing up of negotiation strategy. This should be considered as one of the priority plans.

c) Delivery Plan - in case the hostage-takers change plans in the middle of the execution.

d) Surrender Plan - shall be drawn up in a way that the Hostages' lives will not be jeopardized.

e) Hostage Reception/Release - for security reasons, released hostages shall be contained and isolated.

f) Collection Plan - safety of the police personnel involved is the priority consideration.




2) In handling hostage situations, the IC shall be guided by the following courses of actions:

a) Negotiate

(1) Situation must be stabilized first before the start of the
negotiation.

(2) All attempts to negotiate must be done by remote means.

(3) Adherence to the basic policy on safety of the hostage shall be paramount.

(4) Do not allow outsiders (non-law enforcement officers) into the negotiation process, unless their presence is extremely necessary in the solution of the crisis. If so, they shall be properly advised on the Do's and Don'ts of the hostage negotiation.

(5) Provide relevant information to the tactical teams.

(6) All communication with the hostage-taker must be secured and protected.

(7) Always adhere to the ethics of negotiation.

b) Arrest

(1) Effect the arrest of the hostage-taker when situation
warrants.

(2) Restrain the hostage-taker and conduct thorough search on his/her body and the immediate vicinity of the incident scene.

(3) Inform the arrested person of the circumstances of his/ her arrest, and recite the Miranda warning, and anti- torture warning.




(4) All evidence must be secured and properly documented.

(5) Use reasonable force in arresting the hostage-taker.

(6) Facilitate the transport of the hostage-taker to the nearest police station.

c) Tactical assault

(1) It may be resorted to if the hostage-taker poses imminent danger of causing death or injury to the negotiator or hostage.

(2) When all peaceful means were utilized and failed and the hostage-taker is determined to become more violent.

(3) When peaceful resolution of the incident becomes impossible.

c. Hostage Negotiation Team (HNT)

     Negotiators shall be designated by IC. No one shall be allowed to talk to the hostage-taker without clearance from the Negotiator or IC. The HNT is directly under the control and supervision of the IC. The HNT consists of the team leader/coordinator, primary negotiator, secondary negotiator, intelligence liaison/recorder and board negotiator. The HNT shall:

1) Set-up Negotiation Operation Center (NOC);

2) Initiate contact with the hostage-taker and obtain other information;

3) Give updates to the IC and brief him/her of the current situation;

4) Evaluate the necessity of resorting to other option without
compromising the safety of the hostage(s);

5) Recommend for activation of CMC and deployment of CIMTG as
necessary;




6) Facilitate all deliveries, hostage receptions, and release and
possible surrender of hostage-taker; and

7) Attend to all meetings called by the CMC or IC.

d. Assault Team

     An assault team shall be alerted for deployment in case the negotiation fails. Members of the assault team shall wear authorized and easily recognizable uniform during the conduct of the operation.

e. Crowd Control

A crowd control team shall be deployed to manage and control the
crowd and augment the first responders in securing the perimeter.

f. Support Personnel.

     Support personnel shall include those in charge of managing traffic, firefighting, providing medical emergency assistance, crime scene processing and rescue.

g. After the neutralization of the hostage-taker/s and rescue of the hostage/s, the following processing and debriefing procedures shall be under taken:

1) Clear and secure the crime scene to avoid contamination of
evidence;

2) Evacuate the hostages and other injured persons;

3) Conduct CSI;

4) Conduct debriefing on the hostages and participating personnel;

5) Take the sworn statement of witnesses, hostages, hostage-taker,
and key participants in the incident;

6) Initiate case conferences to facilitate filing of cases;




7) Issue press statements;

8) Submit reports to higher headquarters; and

9) Deactivate the CMC and CIMTG.

4.3 Bomb Threat and Bomb Incident Emergency Response

a. Procedures for FR Upon Receipt of Any Bomb Threat:

1) Treat all threats as serious until proven otherwise;

2) Determine the exact location of the establishment under threat;

3) Proceed immediately to the scene;

4) Coordinate with the security manager or administrator;

5) Conduct visual search in the area and isolate the specific place, if necessary, when a suspicious item is located without causing panic;

6) Alert EODT/K9;

7) Notify HHQ of any development and continue giving updates;

8) Brief the EOD/K9 team upon arrival and assist if necessary; and

9) Provide security at the scene until such time when the EOD/K9 team declares the area is cleared of any incendiaries or explosives.

b. Procedures for FR if a suspected item is found and the EOD/K9
recommended an evacuation from the affected area.

1) Coordinate with the management or administrator to identify the
safety areas for evacuation;

2) Assist in the evacuation of people without causing panic while the
EOD/K9 conducts panelling procedures;

3) Cordon the isolated area to prevent entry of unauthorized persons;
and




4) Coordinate with the management once the EOD/K9 declares the area as cleared and assist the people in resuming their businesses.

c. Procedures for FR if the EOD/K9 confirmed the presence of an explosive
component or Improvised Explosive Device (IED):

1) Report the progress of the incident to the TOC for the following:

a) Summon ambulance and fire trucks to the scene; and

b) Request for deployment of additional police personnel
to establish traffic control, crowd control and security.

2) Lock down the affected area to a distance of at least 300 meters away;

d. Procedures for FR in case of Bomb Explosion

1) Upon receipt of the report:

a) Identify exact location of the incident and proceed to the
scene immediately;

b) Direct EOD/K9 teams to proceed to the area;

c) Notify HHQ of the situation;

d) Report the incident to the TOC for the following:

(1) Summon ambulance, fire trucks and SOCO team to the scene and other resources as may be determined;

(2) Request for deployment of additional police personnel
to establish traffic control, crowd control and security;

2) Upon arrival at the scene:

a) Cordon the area at least 150 meters from the location of
explosion;

b) Assist in the immediate evacuation of the injured if possible;




c) Direct occupants of the establishment to evacuate;

d) Maintain order and crowd control;

e) Seal off location until the EOD/K9 team determines if a secondary device exists;

f) Conduct rescue operations at the scene upon clearance of
the EOD/K9 team;

g) Assist the Post-Blast Investigation (PBI) team and SOCO
team upon clearance from the EOD/K9 team;

h) Submit initial incident report immediately with the following information:

(1) Time when the call for bomb threat was received;

(2) Time of detonation/explosion; and

(3) Description of type of device.

i) Identify any witnesses and bring them to the nearest police
station to obtain their statement;

j) Avoid issuing "speculative" press releases or statements;
and

k) Ensure cooperation with the IOC.


4.4 Civil Disturbance Management (CDM) Operations

a. General Guidelines

     The PNP units tasked to maintain peace and order shall not interfere with the holding of public assembly. To ensure public safety, a CDM contingent under the command of a PCO shall be detailed and stationed at least 100 meters away from the place where the public assembly is being held (Batas Pambansa 880 sec. 9). In the absence of any permit from the LGU concerned, the PCO in command should exert effort in persuading the




demonstrators to disperse peacefully and vacate the public place. In lightning rallies or demonstrations, the Ground Commander shall exhaust efforts through dialogue with the leaders/organizers for voluntary dispersal. In case of failure, orderly dispersal, to include apprehension of those responsible, shall be resorted to. Maximum tolerance must always be exercised (Batas Pambansa 880 sec. 10).

b. Specific Guidelines

     When assistance is requested by the leaders/organizers, it shall be imperative for the CDM contingent to perform their duties while observing the rights of demonstrators. Further, the members of the CDM contingent dealing with the demonstrators shall be in prescribed uniform.

1) The CDM contingent shall not carry any kind of firearms but may be equipped with batons or riot sticks, crash helmets with visor, gas masks, boots or ankle-high shoes with shin guards.

2) Tear gas, smoke grenades, water cannons, or any similar anti-riot device shall not be used unless the public assembly is attended by actual violence or serious threats of violence, or deliberate destruction of property.

3) The organization and membership of CDM contingents, as well as their deployment and employment, shall be in accordance with existing PNP rules and regulations.

4) For every CDM contingent, there shall be a team of negotiators.

5) A separate security contingent may be organized and ready to provide immediate assistance to the CDM contingents as the need arises.

c. CDM Operational Tasks

1) Isolate the area;

2) Secure likely targets;

3) Control the crowds;




4) Establish area control; and

5) Arrest violators.

d. CDM Operational Approaches

1) The commitment of a CDM contingent must be viewed as a last resort. Their role, therefore, should never be greater than what is necessary under the circumstances. This does not mean though that the number of troops employed should be minimized. Doubts concerning the number of troops required should normally be resolved in favor of deploying a large number as it may prevent the development of situations in which the use of force would be necessary. A large reserve of troops should be maintained during civil disturbance operations.

2) In selecting an operational approach to a civil disturbance situation, the Ground Commander and his/her personnel must adhere to the procedures in Force Continuum in Chapter 2 Section 2-4 of this POP.

3) Efforts should be exerted to create the image of a restrained and well-disciplined force, the sole purpose of which is to assist in the restoration of law and order. Further, while CDM contingent should be visible, any activity which might excite rather than calm the situation should be avoided when possible.

4) Consistent with the controlling principle "that he/she must use the minimum necessary force to accomplish his/her mission", the Ground Commander shall equip the CDM contingent only with rattan sticks/truncheons/batons, shields, kevlar helmets and handcuffs.

5) In situations requiring the use of batons/truncheons, only target fleshy parts of the body such as arms, torso, legs, and thighs. Hitting protesters with the baton or truncheon on the head, face, neck, shoulder blades, elbows, fingers, groins, knees, and ankles must be avoided since strikes to these parts may cause serious to permanent injuries, or even death.




6) Arrested protesters must be restrained, handcuffed and brought
safely to the police station for processing.

7) In any CDM deployment, there should be trained and equipped female CDM personnel.

4.5 Public Assembly

a. Policies

1) The PNP adheres to the Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials (1979, Art 2-3) adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations that requires law enforcement officials to respect and protect human dignity, maintain and uphold the human rights of all persons, and limit the use of force to situations where it is strictly necessary and to the extent required for the performance of their duty.

2) Public assemblies held in freedom parks or on private property do not need a permit for the activity.

3) The PNP shall provide police assistance only when requested by the leaders or organizers for maintenance of peace and order or to ensure the safety of those participating in the public assemblies held in freedom parks or on private property.

4) A public assembly held in a public place must have a permit from the mayor of the city or municipality exercising jurisdiction over the place where it will be held.

5) A public assembly held with or without a permit may be peacefully dispersed. A public assembly with a permit may be dispersed if the same is being held in violation of the terms and conditions imposed in the permit. In both cases, before conducting any dispersal operation, the PNP shall notify the concerned organizers and leaders of the public assembly.

6) Lightning demonstrations or rallies in areas where public assembly is prohibited shall be dispersed peacefully. However, should any of




the participants refuse to disperse voluntarily or violate any law or ordinance during an unauthorized public assembly, they shall be taken into police custody and be charged accordingly.

7) Ground Commanders are responsible in determining whether there is a permit for the holding of the public assembly.

8) Close coordination with the mayor of the city or municipality, or his/her representative, where the public assembly is being held should always be maintained especially when a permit has not been issued but an application has been filed prior to the holding of the public assembly.

9) Maximum tolerance shall be exercised in the conduct of dispersal operations.

b. Police Responses

     The following are the police responses during the planning stage, initial and peaceful stage, confrontational stage, violent stage and post operation stage:

1) During Planning Stage

a) Initiate dialogue with the leaders/organizers to ensure the peaceful holding of a public assembly, including among others, the detail of police personnel providing security in the area.

b) Prepare appropriate security and CDM contingency plans.

2) During Initial and Peaceful Stage

a) With Permit or Held in Freedom Parks/ Private Properties

(1) The PNP shall not interfere with the holding of a public assembly. However, to adequately ensure public safety, a CDM contingent, under the control and supervision of a PCO shall be stationed at least 100 meters away from the area where the public assembly is being held.




(2) Monitor the activities at the public assembly area and respond to any request for police assistance.

b) Without Permit or Permit has been revoked

(1) As soon as it becomes apparent that an assembly is being held in a public place, the Ground Commander shall immediately conduct an inquiry whether the assembly is covered with a permit or not. If a permit could not be shown, verification should immediately be done with the Office of the Mayor having jurisdiction over the place where the public assembly is being held. Should the Office of the Mayor confirm that a permit has not been issued, the leaders/organizers shall be informed of the fact that they are violating the law and will be asked to disperse peacefully.

(2) The PNP shall exhaust all peaceful remedies to persuade the demonstrators to disperse. This may include the involvement of Local Chief Executives (LCE)/community leaders when available to intervene in the situation so that dispersal operations could be avoided.

(3) Should negotiation fail and the demonstrators refuse to disperse voluntarily and peacefully, thereby causing public inconvenience, CDM contingents may commence dispersal operations after the CDM commander announced the violations of law they have committed. Such announcement of the violations must be made at least three times.

3) During Breach of Peace/Confrontational Stage (With or without permit)

     No public assembly with a permit shall be dispersed. However, when a public assembly becomes violent, the CDM contingents may disperse such public assembly in the following manner:




a) At the first sign of an impending violence, the Ground Commander shall call the attention of the leaders/organizers of the public assembly and ask the latter to prevent any possible disturbance. CDM contingents shall hold the line to prevent demonstrators from proceeding to other areas where the holding of a public assembly is prohibited.

b) If actual violence reaches a point where rocks or other harmful objects from the participants are thrown at the CDM contingents or the non-participants, or at any property causing damage to it, the Ground Commander shall audibly warn the participants that if the disturbance persists, the public assembly will be dispersed;

c) If the violence or disturbance does not stop, the Ground Commander shall audibly issue a warning to the participants of the public assembly, and after allowing a reasonable period of time to lapse, shall immediately order it to disperse. With the use of CDM formations, the rank of demonstrators shall be disbanded, contained, and isolated from each other, and should be prevented from regrouping.

d) Water cannons and riot sticks may be used to repel aggression and to disperse demonstrators and reserve CDM contingents may be employed when situation requires.

e) No arrest of any leader, organizer or participant shall be made unless he/she violates a law, statute, or ordinance during the assembly.

4) During Violent Stage

a) Non-lethal weapons and equipment may be used to suppress violence, to protect lives and prevent further damage to properties.

b) PNP security elements shall be tactically deployed to provide immediate assistance to the CDM contingents.




5) Post-Operation Stage:

a) CDM contingents shall be withdrawn after the area has been cleared of possible danger to public safety.

b) Sufficient police force shall be maintained to ensure peace
and order in the area.

c. Dispersal of Public Assembly with Permit

     All public assemblies with permits shall not be dispersed. However, when an assembly becomes violent, the police may disperse such public assembly in the following manner:

1) At the first sign of impending violence, the Ground Commander of the PNP contingent shall call the attention of the leaders of the public assembly and ask the latter to prevent any possible disturbance;

2) If actual violence reaches a point where rocks or other harmful objects from the participants are thrown at the police officers or at the non-participants, or at any property, causing damage to it, the Ground Commander of the PNP contingent shall audibly warn the participants that if the disturbance persists, the public assembly will be dispersed;

3) If the violence or disturbance does not stop, the Ground Commander of the PNP contingent shall audibly issue a warning to the participants of the public assembly, and after allowing a reasonable period of time to lapse, he shall immediately order it to disperse; and

4) No arrest of any leader, organizer or participant shall be made unless he violates during the assembly a law, statute, or ordinance.

d. Dispersal of Public Assembly Without Permit

     When the public assembly is held without a permit where a permit is required, the said public assembly may be peacefully dispersed. However, when the leaders or organizers of public assembly can show an application




for permit duly filed at the Office of the Mayor which has jurisdiction over the place where the rally will be held, at least five days prior to the intended activity and the Mayor did not act on the same, the grant of the permit being then presumed under the law, and it will be the burden of the authorities to show that there has been a denial of the application, in which case, the rally may be peacefully dispersed following the procedure of maximum tolerance prescribed by law.

e. Prohibited Acts

     The following prohibitions provided by Section 13 of Batas Pambansa (BP) 880 shall be strictly observed:

1) Obstructing,  impeding,  disrupting  or  otherwise  denying  the
exercise of the right to peaceful assembly;

2) The unnecessary firing of firearms to disperse the public assembly.

3) Acts in violation of paragraph "d" of this Rule;

4) Acts described hereunder if committed within 100 meters from the
area of activity of the public assembly;

a) The carrying of a deadly or offensive weapon or device such as firearm, pillbox, bomb, and the like;

b) The carrying of a bladed weapon;

c) The malicious burning of any object in the streets or
thoroughfares;

d) The carrying of firearms by CDM contingents;

e) The interfering with or intentionally disturbing the holding of a public assembly by the use of a motor vehicle, its horns and loud sound systems;

f) The drinking of liquor or alcoholic beverages; and

g) Gambling of any kind.




f. Guidelines in dealing with Assemblies, Rallies, Demonstrations and Marches

1) To ensure the protection, safety and welfare of the public and demonstrators as well, the following must be observed:

a) Confined Assemblies in Private Property (churches, schools,
etc.)

(1) Initiate the conduct of dialogue with the leaders/ organizers.

(2) Secure and maintain order within the perimeter.

b) Confined Assemblies in Freedom Parks

(1) Initiate the conduct of dialogue with the leaders/ organizers.

(2) Secure and contain the area within the limits of the permit to ensure the orderly and peaceful conduct of the assembly.

c) Mobile Assemblies in a Private Area

(1) Initiate the conduct of dialogue with the leaders/ organizers.

(2) Secure and maintain order within the perimeter.

d) Marches and Motorcades along Public Thoroughfares

(1) Initiate the conduct of dialogue with the leaders/ organizers.

(2) Request for the permit from the leaders/organizers if the local ordinance of the area requires one.




(3) Ensure the orderly and peaceful conduct of the marches and motorcades to ensure public safety and to prevent compromise of public convenience.

2) There shall always be a designated Ground Commander at the
rally site;

3) If necessary, provide a medical team to extend assistance; and

4) All CDM operations shall be properly documented with video and
photo coverage;


4.6 Procedures for Responding PNP Personnel in Enforcing Quarantine Measures to Manage Health Hazards

      Since the outbreak of Covid-19, the PNP has played a crucial role in supporting the government's efforts to control the disease and promote safer communities. Covid-19 may not be the last health hazard that the country will experience. It is therefore essential for PNP personnel enforcing the quarantine measures to work together with other government agencies, the local government units and the community in addressing other similar threats.

a. Initial Response Upon the Impact of Health Hazard

1) PNP responders who first arrived at the scene shall initially and
simultaneously perform the following:

a) Assess and secure the scene, cordon and prevent the ingress
and egress of individuals to the area of impact;

b) Ensure the observance of safety protocol and use Personal
Protective Equipment (PPE) and respiratory protection;

c) In situations where the victims are directly exposed to a non-contagious health hazard as assessed by authorities, immediately evacuate them to a safe area while waiting for the emergency responders;

d) Immediately inform the Chief of Police (COP) or Station Commander and the station TOC, which will then call other emergency groups;




e) Make a record of the initial emergency responders who
arrived at the area and their actions taken;

2) Establish the Incident Command Post (ICP) with the COP or Station Commander who shall initially act as IC until such time the mayor or responsible officer has made an official designation of his/her IC.

3) Immediately turn over the scene to the designated IC upon his/her
arrival;

4) Assist the IC in matters pertaining to the provision of security and
maintenance of law and order;

5) Designate an investigator who shall coordinate with the investigators from BFP and other concerned agencies to gather relevant information, if necessary;

6) If the health hazard is the result of an illegal act such as disposal of hazardous materials, the PNP may immediately effect the arrest of the identified suspect/s, if warranted; and

7) Wait for the official announcement that the area of impact has
been cleared from any health hazard before leaving the scene.

b. When the Health Hazard Becomes Widespread and has Affected Many
Communities

1) Assist in the implementation of government-issued guidelines and
issuances in mitigating the effect of health hazard;

2) Establish health hazard control points for the implementation of travel restrictions without compromising the movement of essential goods and authorized persons;

3) Implement the guidelines in the observance of the minimum public
health standards;

4) Activate law and order cluster and observe the CIMOP guidelines;




5) Ensure that all PNP personnel rendering duty in health hazard control points, isolation or quarantine facilities are using appropriate PPEs;

6) Coordinate with the PNP health service in organizing and capacitating the Medical Reserve Force (MRFs) in the management of health hazard;

7) Assist the LGUs in the conduct of contact tracing when requested;

8) Provide security in quarantine/isolation facilities or escort in the
transport of affected and infected individuals, when requested; and

9) Observe proper decontamination procedures/protocol in coordination with the PNP Health Service or other authorized health offices.

c. Other Activities Relative to Public Safety and Security

1) Organize Reactionary Support and Standby Force (RSSF) for
possible deployment;

2) Provide security in the arrival, transport and distribution of goods
and medical supplies;

3) Conduct Red Teaming operations;

4) Conduct awareness campaign through TRIMP; and

5) Provide security to other government programs/activities that
require police assistance;

d. Arrest of Violators in Relation to Health Hazard Laws, Guidelines and Protocols

1) PNP personnel must be abreast of the prevailing directives, laws, and ordinances relating to health hazards and must maintain copies of the same;

2) Arrest shall be done in accordance with guidelines and procedures on Arrest in Rule 2.6 of this POP and with observance of public health standards and protocol;




3) All arrested persons shall be subjected to an initial investigation and booking at a designated holding area if necessary. They shall be separated from other persons under police custody until cleared from any diseases/infection;

4) When the law or ordinance prescribes the penalty of fine and allows the person apprehended to pay voluntarily the fine imposed prior to the filing of a formal complaint with the appropriate prosecution office, he/she shall be allowed to pay said fine with the concerned City/Municipality/Barangay where he/she was apprehended to avoid being criminally prosecuted; and

5) Respect for human rights and dignity of persons shall be observed at all times.



Rule 5 Special Police Operations


5.1 Major Events Security Management

      Major events are events of national and international significance where the overall responsibility for ensuring the safety and security rests with the host country/region/organization among others. These events involve very very important persons (VVIPS) and political figures who are potential targets of terrorists, criminals, and protest actions. Extensive planning and comprehensive approach are necessary in developing the security plan for a major event.

      The PNP undertakes necessary administrative and operational activities to ensure the safe and orderly hosting of major events. These activities are undertaken in coordination with concerned international and local government agencies, NGOs and other concerned private individuals. They are often co-sponsored, planned and executed jointly by public and private-sector interests across different government jurisdictions by multiple agencies.

a. Classification of Major Events

1) International, National and Local Special Events. These are events that involve a whole-of-government approach in ensuring safety




and security to attain the desired objectives of the major event. Any untoward incident that may transpire during these activities could adversely affect the country in terms of its capability to ensure safety and security.

a) International Events. These are events of international significance being participated by heads of state/government, ministers, senior officials, and representatives in the public or private sectors. These events involve two or more nations or those that cross beyond international boundaries such as but not limited to the following: Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) or Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) summits, conferences, meetings, and sporting events.

b) National Events. These are events observed nationwide that require multi-agency collaboration. These are events that are within the boundaries of the country such as but not limited to the State of the Nation Address (SONA), Philippine Independence Day, Palarong Pambansa, Rizal Day and Labor Day.

c) Local Special Events. These are events in a particular area or place that also need a whole-of-government approach such as but not limited to Panagbenga, Sinulog, Feast of the Black Nazarene, Dinagyang, Ati-Atihan and events that are frequented by foreign and local tourists.

2) Election/plebiscite/referendum. These events include the election of public officers, and the people's democratic exercise to approve or reject an initiative on the constitution, or a legislation.

3) Presidential visits. These events involve all visits and engagements of the president outside of Malacaan Palace.

4) Public assembly. It is a mass gathering of people such as demonstration, march parade, procession or any other form of mass or concerted action held in a public place for the purpose of expressing political, economic, social or religious views and opinions supporting policies of or petitioning the government for




redress of grievances.

b. Creation of Joint Security Task Forces (STF)

1) Upon the issuance of an executive order from the national government to create a National Organizing Committee (NOC), the involved member agencies develop working plans for the organization of different committees, which include the creation of a joint STF.

2) The joint STF is headed by the CPNP or his/her authorized representative as Commander. He shall be assisted by two deputies, one from the AFP and the other from the PNP. The STF shall be composed of three main Task Groups (TG): Security, Peace and Order, and Emergency Preparedness and Response. Different Site TGs and Site Sub-TGs shall likewise be formed where the events are conducted (Annex "GG").

3) The STF Commander shall be supported by the following staff: Critical Incident Response Force (CIRF), STF Secretariat (Red Team, Border Control, Diplomatic Liaison Team, PCTC/Interpol), Multi-Agency Coordination Center (MACC), Intelligence Fusion Center, SynchComm/Spokesperson and Finance and Logistics Group.

4) During the planning stage, it shall be the responsibility of the TG Commander to coordinate with other concerned government agencies to designate a head of a particular sub-TG/TU.

5) For local special events, similar joint STFs shall likewise be created preferably headed by the Regional Directror (RD) as the joint Local Event STF (LESTF) Commander. He/she shall be assisted by two deputies, one from the AFP and the other from the PNP. He may require his/her Provincial Director (PD)/ City Director (CD) to make the appropriate representation with the concerned LCE, through the local POC, for the passing of a resolution or issuance of the local executive order creating the LESTF. In the absence of a resolution/order, the RD shall initiate the creation of the LESTF, in coordination with other involved agencies.

6) For other sporting events affecting only a particular locality, such
as the Federation of International Basketball Association (FIBA),




the site TG or LESTF shall be created, preferably headed by the RD who shall exercise overall operational control and supervision over involved NSUs and other agencies.

7) The creation of sub-TGs and Task Units (TUs) provided in Rule
5.1 d to f shall be dependent on the required tasks that shall be provided at the identified sites where the meetings and other activities are to be conducted.

8) For national events, the PNP shall provide the appropriate security coverage under the overall supervision of CPNP or his/ her authorized representative at the national level, while the RDs and their subordinate Unit Commanders shall act as the Officers Primarily Responsible (OPR) for securing the events affecting their respective jurisdictions, in coordination with other local security and law enforcement agencies.

9) For elections, plebiscites or referendums, the establishment of COMELEC checkpoints and other intensified law enforcement operations shall be guided by the procedures in the conduct of joint checkpoints in Rule 2.2f of this POP and COMELEC issuances.

10) For presidential visits, the PNP, in coordination with the Presidential Security Group (PSG), AFP and other concerned government agencies, shall provide the necessary security coverage in all areas of his/her engagement in the country.

c. Procedures in the Establishment and Operationalization of Multi-Agency Coordinating Center

1) The STF/LESTF Commander or his/her authorized representative shall be responsible in coordinating with the event organizing committee for the establishment of the MACC;

2) The STF/LESTF Commander shall designate a MACC Commander who will be assisted by a Battle Captain who works 24/7. The MACC shall be complemented by a security force;

3) The MACC shall be established in the nearest strategic location to where a particular event is held, preferably with available communication signal;




4) All involved PNP units and agencies shall ensure the detail of their respective action officers and communicators to the MACC to facilitate coordination;

5) The Battle Captain may either be designated permanently until the termination of the event or on rotation basis from among the list of PCOs who have undergone the appropriate capability enhancement training or seminar during the security planning and preparation stages;

6) The Battle Captain shall be in charge of synchronizing and integrating the daily activities and operations at the MACC of all representatives of the different tasked units/agencies; and

7) Specifically, the Battle Captain monitors the movement of delegates/ participants and status of the actual deployment of involved TUs. He/she assesses and analyzes all information and concerns and relays it to the concerned units/agencies for appropriate action.

d. Procedures to be undertaken by the Commander, TG Security

1) Secure the delegates and participants in all areas of engagement during their stay in the country by providing appropriate airport, close-in, convoy, onboard, route, billet, venue and area security packages;

2) Organize and establish a TG Secretariat to monitor all the activities
of the sub-TGs;

3) Coordinate and liaise with concerned agencies for information concerning the itineraries and other requirements of delegates and participants for the provision of their appropriate security;

4) Conduct training, exercises (tabletop, CommEx, SimEx, CerEx, MarEx, etc), walkthrough, dry runs and contingency planning at the identified engagement areas for familiarization and capability enhancement of the involved units/agencies;

5) Activate the financial and logistical sub-TG to provide all logistical and financial requirements of the TG in coordination with the committee on budget and fiscal; and




6) Organize and provide support to the following sub-TGs:

a) Sub-TG on heads of state/government security - the PSG is designated as lead agency that shall have overall and exclusive responsibility for their 24/7 protection, as well as their immediate family members;

b) Sub-TG on delegates security - responsible for the overall protection of all delegates and VIPs other than the heads of state/government. It shall organize the following task units (TU):

(1) TU airport security - responsible for airport security coverage to all the VIPs, delegates and their parties within the airport premises and its environs;

(2) TU close-in security - responsible for the 24/7 executive protection for VIPs other than the heads of state/ government, their spouses and family;

(3) TU convoy security - responsible for the protection of VIPs other than the heads of state/government, their spouses and family during land movements;

(4) TU route security - responsible for the road-side
security along convoy routes;

(5) TU billet security - responsible for the security of hotels/
billet areas of delegates/participants; and

(6) TU area security - responsible for the land, air and maritime security in support to the sub-TG heads of state/government and sub-TG delegates security;

c) Sub-TG on technical capability and anti-intrusion - responsible
for the countermeasure techniques/anti-intrusion system;

d) Sub-TG on diplomatic security - responsible for the security liaising of the diplomatic missions, security officers of the heads of state/government and other VIPs to ensure synchronized and coordinative applications and delivery of public safety and security services;




e) Sub-TG on intel operations - responsible for real time intelligence and counter-intelligence requirements needed before, during and after the event.

e. Procedures to be undertaken by the Commander, TG Peace and Order

1) Ensure peace and order in the working and general environment in all sites where the meetings and other activities are conducted through sustained and extensive inter-agency anti-criminality campaigns, traffic management, public order, internal security operations, maritime operations, air defense and other related campaigns to negate threats or disruptions to the major event;

2) Organize and provide support to the following sub-TGs:

a) Sub-TG on Air Operations and Defense - responsible for the
detection of hostile aircraft and air defense capability;

b) Sub-TG on Community Relations - responsible for the development and maintainance of a strong mutually beneficial relationship with the community;

c) Sub-TG on Critical Infrastructure Security - responsible for the protection and security of all transportation, communication, power systems, and critical infrastructure;

d) Sub-TG on Cyber IT/Radio Communications - responsible for the provision of a secured information and smooth operations of communications technology, information systems and resources to support efficient and accessible IT services to both foreign and local delegates;

e) Sub-TG on Tourist Protection - responsible for the promotion of security and safety of VIPs and delegates who may visit certain tourist destination and business areas. They shall be in-charge of securing the ports, airports, bus terminals/ stations and other jump-off points leading to these areas;

f) Sub-TG on Anti-Criminality - responsible for intensified law enforcement operations;




g) Sub-TG on Internal Security - responsible for intensified internal security operations;

h) Sub-TG on Maritime Security - responsible for intensified maritime/coastal security operations;

i) Sub-TG on Site Security - responsible for the protection of the engagement area before and during the meetings and activities;

j) Sub-TG on Traffic Management - responsible for efficient movement of convoys along routes of the delegates;

k) Sub-TG on Protective Technical Service/EOD-K9 - responsible for bomb/IED detection, controlled detonation, and disposal operations;

l) Sub-TG on Public Order - responsible for CDM operations;

f. Procedures to be Undertaken by the Commander, TG Emergency Preparedness and Response

1) Orchestrate efforts of all NDRRMC member agencies in the preparation and overall emergency preparedness and response for all natural calamity scenarios in all engagement areas, including storm surges, power outage, disruption of services and utilities, airport incidents and other emergencies;

2) Lead the consequence management efforts in the event of a terrorist attack, rallies and protest actions and other human- induced incidents;

3) Capacitate local DRRMCs through training, rehearsals, simulation exercises and contingency planning sessions, including the organization and equipage of local responder groups that will be deployed;

4) Provide periodic warning, alerts and advisories for the member agencies, the chairmen of the committee and the STF commander for subsequent information to NOC and committees for their appropriate information as basis for planning and simultaneously




conducting	prevention	and	preparations	and	eventual
implementation of contingency plans;

5) Attend to the emergency medical requirements of the heads of states/government and their delegation and other conference delegations in all engagement areas;

6) Lead the prevention, risk reduction and consequence management of Chemical, Biological, Radiological, Nuclear And Explosives (CBRNE) scenario;

7) Organize and provide support to the following Sub TGs:

a) Sub-TG on Disaster Risk Reduction and Management - responsible for disaster risk reduction and management, as  well  as  the  organization, training  and equipping of at least three responder units depending on the risk assessment in respective localities. It shall be composed of, but not limited to, the following TUs:

(1) TU Search and Rescue - responsible for the conduct of search and rescue, and evacuation of delegates and participants in case of emergencies resulting from natural calamity and/or human-induced disaster;

(2) TU Medical Emergency Management - responsible for prompt medical attention to all delegates and participants, including management of the dead, in case of emergencies resulting from natural calamity and/or human-induced disaster;

(3) TU CBRNE - responsible for any CBRNE prevention,
risk reduction and consequence management;

(4) TU Fire - responsible for the response to emergencies and rescue of delegates and participants threatened by fire incidents; and

(5) TU Evacuation Management - responsible for managing the evacuees who are delegates and




participants, including management of the missing, in case of emergencies resulting from natural calamity and/or human-induced disaster.

b) Sub-TG on Fire Safety - responsible for fire safety compliance
of all proposed venues.

5.2 Police Assistance During the Implementation of Orders or Decisions from Courts, Quasi-Judicial or Administrative Bodies

      The request for police assistance shall be submitted to the Office of the CPNP in case the final decision or order to be implemented is rendered by the Supreme Court, the Court of Appeals, the Court of Tax Appeals, the Sandiganbayan, Quasi- Judicial Bodies or Administrative Bodies.

      If the final decision or order is rendered by the Regional Trial Court (RTC) or the Municipal Trial Court (MTC), the request shall be submitted to the Office of the RD of the PRO having territorial jurisdiction over the place of implementation.

      The request for police assistance of quasi-judicial or administrative bodies shall be submitted to the Office of the CPNP regardless of the place where the police assistance shall be rendered, but the same may be delegated to the Regional Director upon the discretion of the CPNP in accordance with Section 26, RA 6975.

Request for police assistance in the implementation of final decisions/
orders/writs shall be acted only, upon compliance of the following conditions:

* The request for police assistance is based on an order of the court,
quasi-judicial or administrative bodies;

* The written request for police assistance shall be signed by the Sheriff or equivalent officer in quasi-judicial or administrative bodies;

* The request is filed at least five working days prior to the actual implementation; and

* The original document of the final decision/order/resolution must be presented. In the absence of the same, a copy duly authenticated by the Clerk of Court or other authorized representative of the court, quasi- judicial or administrative body will suffice.




a. During Labor Disputes

1) General Policy and Guidelines

a) The involvement of PNP personnel during strikes, lockouts and labor disputes in general shall be limited to the maintenance of peace and order, enforcement of laws, and implementation of legal orders of the duly constituted authorities.

b) In case of actual violence, the police can respond without the written request.

c) No PNP personnel shall be allowed to render police assistance in connection with a strike or lockout if there is question or complaint as regards his/her relationship by affinity or consanguinity to any official/leader of the parties in the controversy or if he has financial or pecuniary interest therein.

d) PNP personnel detailed as peace-keeping force in strike or lockout areas shall wear the prescribed police uniform.

e) They shall exercise maximum tolerance and when called for by the situation or when all other peaceful and non-violent means have been exhausted, police officers may employ such means as may be necessary and reasonable to prevent or repel an aggression.

f) The matter of determining whether a strike, picket or lockout is legal or not should be left to Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE) and its appropriate agencies. PNP personnel should not interfere in a strike, picket or lockout, except as herein provided.

g) No personal escort shall be provided to any of the parties to the controversy unless upon written request from DOLE. Whenever escorts are to be provided, the other party shall be informed accordingly. All escorts shall be in prescribed uniform.




h) During the pendency of a strike/lockout, the police personnel concerned are prohibited from socializing with any of the parties involved in the controversy.

i) Liaison shall be established and maintained with the representatives of DOLE, management and the union in the strike/lockout area for the purpose of maintaining peace and order, as well as to maintain a continuing peaceful dialogue between the parties to the strike/lockout.

j) The peace-keeping detail shall establish a command post outside the 50-meter radius from the picket line. A PCO shall be designated as Head/Commander of the peace keeping force that will be responsible for the command and control of the detailed personnel. The members of the peacekeeping detail shall stay outside a 50-meter radius from the picket line. However, in cases wherein the 50-meter radius includes a public thoroughfare, they may station themselves in such public thoroughfare to ensure that the flow of traffic will be unhampered.

2) Applicable Legal Parameters

     The pertinent provisions of the Public Assembly Act of 1985 (Batas Pambansa 880), the Labor Code of the Philippines, as amended and other applicable laws, shall be observed during rallies, strikes, demonstrations or other public assemblies. Law enforcement agents shall, at all times:

a) Exercise maximum tolerance;

b) In case of unlawful aggression, only reasonable force may
be employed to prevent or repel it;

c) The employment of tear gas and water cannons shall be made under the control and supervision of the Ground Commander; and

d) No arrest of any leader, organizer, or participant shall be made during the public assembly, unless he/she violates any pertinent law as evidence warrants.




3) Service of Lawful Orders or Writ

     The service of DOLE, court, or other lawful orders or writs is the primary concern of the DOLE representative, sheriff, and representative of the government agency issuing the order, when specifically stated and requested in the order or writ, shall the PNP enforce such orders or writs.

4) Prohibited Labor Activities

No personnel of the PNP shall:

a) Bring in, introduce, or escort in any manner, any individual who seeks to replace strikers in entering or leaving the premises or a strike area; or

b) Work in replacement of the strikers.

5) Obstruction During Pickets and Lock Downs

     The ingress or egress of an establishment is not part of a strike or picket area. If the picket or lock down causes obstruction, the PNP must first exert all peaceful means to clear the obstruction before resorting to crowd dispersal.

b. During Enforcement of Demolition and Ejectment Orders

1) Role of the PNP in the Enforcement of a Demolition and/or Ejectment Order

a) Police assistance in the enforcement or implementation of a demolition or ejectment order shall be granted only upon a written request of the Sheriff or equivalent officer in quasi- judicial and administrative bodies accompanied by a valid order issued by a competent court, quasi-judicial or administrative body and, when required, with written permission from the Local Housing Board in accordance with Executive Order (EO) 708 amending EO 152 and Department of Interior and Local Government (DILG) Memo Circular No. 2008-143. The proponent shall only be provided with police assistance upon




presentation of Certification from the Local Housing Board that requirements under RA 7279 are complied with for urban areas. Moreover, said police assistance shall be coordinated with the concerned LCE before its enforcement. In no case shall a demolition involving informal settlers be effected without a pre-demolition conference with the presence of all parties involved.

b) The conduct of pre-demolition conference in cases where the affected families are informal settlers shall be mandatory before the provision of police assistance.

c) The duties of PNP personnel in any demolition or ejectment activity shall be limited to the maintenance of peace and order, protection of life and property, and enforcement of laws and legal orders.

d) PNP personnel tasked to provide police assistance shall be in prescribed uniform during the actual demolition. They shall be limited only to occupying the first line of law enforcement and civil disturbance control; shall not participate in the physical dismantling of any structure subject of demolition; and shall use only necessary and reasonable force.

2) Procedures in the Enforcement of a Demolition and/or Ejectment Order

a) Risk and threat assessment shall be conducted;

b) PNP personnel should be informed of the prevailing situation
and their tasks;

c) Strict observance of Human Rights must be adhered;

d) As much as practicable, the COP shall lead the PNP contingent detailed to assist the Sheriff or equivalent officer during the demolition/ejectment activity;

e) All PNP personnel involved shall desist from the use of any unnecessary force or any act that may harm, harass, or terrorize the affected parties;




f) The mode of participation shall be limited to the maintenance of peace and order during the entire demolition/ejectment activity, ensuring the protection of all parties from harm and injury;

g) Tear gas, water cannons, and reasonable force shall be used only when all other peaceful and non-violent means have been exhausted;

h) Any PNP member whose families are affected with the demolition or ejectment shall adhere to the order issued by competent authority. In no case shall a PNP member intervene during the implementation of such order or enforcement of demolition and/or ejectment; and

i) The COP shall ensure the presence of fire and medical teams
in the activity area.

c. During Implementation of Final Decisions or Orders of the Courts in Civil Cases, of Quasi-judicial Bodies and of Administrative Bodies within their Jurisdiction

1) Police Assistance in the Implementation of Final Decisions or Orders or Resolutions of the Courts in Civil Cases, of Quasi- Judicial Bodies and of Administrative Bodies, (Except Cases with Issued Temporary Restraining Order or Injunction)

     All requests for police assistance regardless of which courts, quasi-judicial bodies or administrative bodies render the final decision or order shall be submitted to the RD of the PRO where the police assistance will be rendered.

2) Requirements for Police Assistance

     Request for police assistance in the implementation of final decisions/orders/writs shall be acted only, upon compliance of the following conditions:

a) The request for police assistance is based on an order of the
court, quasi-judicial or administrative bodies;




b) The written request for police assistance including a certification shall be signed by the Sheriff or equivalent officer in quasi-judicial or administrative bodies;

c) The request is filed at least five working days prior to the actual implementation; and

d) The original document of the final decision/order/resolution must be presented. In the absence of the same, a copy duly authenticated by the Clerk of Court or other authorized representative of the court, quasi-judicial or administrative body will suffice.

3) Period to Render Police Assistance

     If the requirements have been satisfied, police assistance shall be rendered within three working days from receipt of the directive from the CPNP or RD, PRO. Unless a specific period is written in the order or due to inherent impossibility of rendering assistance, a longer period may be required.

4) Office or Unit That May Be Tasked to Render Police Assistance

     The CPNP, as may be recommended by The Director for Operations (TDO), may task any operational support unit of the PNP or the PRO that has jurisdiction in the area where the decision/order/resolution shall be implemented to render police assistance.

     In case of request to the RD, PRO, the latter may task PNP Mobile Forces, City Police Office/Station (CPS) or Municipal Police Station (MPS) within his/her jurisdiction to render police assistance. For requests filed directly to the LPUs or operational support units, the same shall be referred to the CPNP or RD, PRO, as appropriate. No police assistance shall be rendered until the CPNP or RD, PRO shall have acted on the request.

5) Extent of Police Assistance

     The Head of Office or Unit tasked to render police assistance shall have the discretion to employ sufficient number of PNP uniformed personnel after taking into consideration the importance of the case, the scope of the resistance to be encountered, if there is any, and the




general peace and order condition in the area. Unless a higher ranking officer is necessary and more PNP personnel shall be required, the police team that will render police assistance shall be led by a PCO with the rank of at least a Police Captain. All the team members shall be in prescribed uniform while rendering assistance

6) Role of PNP Personnel Rendering Police Assistance

     PNP personnel shall observe maximum tolerance and respect for human rights at all times. Dialogue with those who may be affected by the implementation of the decision/order/resolution is encouraged to prevent violence, and the assistance of local public officials, when warranted, should be requested. However, the Sheriff or the equivalent officer of quasi-judicial or administrative bodies shall have the final disposition whether to proceed with the implementation of the decision/ order/resolution or not. The use of reasonable force shall only be resorted for self-defense and in defense of strangers. The role of the PNP shall be limited to the maintenance of peace and order, crowd control, and the security of the Sheriff or equivalent officer of quasi-judicial or administrative body. In no case shall PNP personnel participate in the implementation of the decision/order/resolution by performing acts not herein mentioned, such as, but not limited to, dismantling, hauling of personal property and other analogous acts.

d. During the Implementation of Final Decisions or Orders or Resolutions of the COMELEC or DILG or Local Government Unit Exercising Disciplinary Powers in Administrative Cases of Elected Officials

1) Requirements for the Request for Police Assistance

     The police assistance shall only be granted upon the written request of COMELEC or DILG, accompanied with the original or authenticated copy of the final decision or order or resolution to be implemented. A Special Task Group shall be created for this purpose.

2) Period to Render Police Assistance

     If the requirements have been satisfied, police assistance shall be rendered within three working days from receipt of the directive from the CPNP. Unless a specific period is written in the order or due to inherent impossibility of rendering assistance, a longer period may be required.




3) Extent of Police Assistance

     The Special Task Group Commander tasked to render police assistance shall have the discretion to employ enough PNP uniformed personnel after taking into consideration the threat and risk assessment. All members of the Special Task Group shall be in prescribed uniform when rendering police assistance.

4) Role of PNP Personnel Rendering Police Assistance

     The role of the PNP when rendering police assistance shall be limited to the maintenance of peace and order, crowd control, and the security of the duly authorized officer of the DILG, COMELEC or the LGU who has the responsibility in implementing the decision/order/ resolution. The aforementioned duly authorized officer shall have the final disposition whether to proceed or not with the implementation.

     No PNP personnel shall participate in the implementation by performing acts, such as, but not limited to, dismantling, hauling of personal property and other analogous acts. The PNP personnel shall at all times respect human rights, observe maximum tolerance and exercise utmost impartiality and neutrality. The use of reasonable force shall only be resorted for self-defense and in defense of strangers.

e. During the Implementation of Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program (CARP)

1) Coverage of Police Assistance

a) Preliminary Agrarian Activities

(1) Land survey
(2) Field Investigation
(3) Ocular Inspection
(4) Meeting between actual and potential agrarian reform
beneficiaries
(5) Post Installation
(6) Landholding tagging
(7) Analogous cases




b) Implementation of Final Orders

(1) Final	Orders/Resolutions	/Decisions	Issued	by Department of Agrarian Reform (DAR)

(2) Order of Installation or Certificate of Land Ownership
Award (CLOA)

2) Requirements in the Granting of Police Assistance

     Police assistance in the implementation of CARP shall be provided only as requested by DAR, duly approved by the CPNP or RD,PRO.

a) Police assistance during the conduct of preliminary agrarian activities as provided in Rule 5.2e1)(a) shall be rendered only upon a written request submitted by the Agrarian Reform Officer (ARO) or any authorized Officer of DAR, accompanied with the original or authenticated copy of the order issued for the activity. The request shall be submitted to the Office of the RD of the PRO having jurisdiction over the area of execution for his/her approval.

b) Police assistance in the implementation of final orders, decisions, resolutions or CLOAs issued DAR shall be rendered only upon a written request submitted by the ARO or any authorized officer of DAR, accompanied with the original or authenticated copy of the final decision, order or CLOA to be implemented. The request and its attachments, regardless of the place of execution, shall be submitted to the Office of the CPNP for his/her approval.

3) Extent of Police Assistance

     The head of office or unit tasked to render police assistance shall have the discretion to employ enough PNP uniformed personnel after taking into consideration the threat and risk assessment. The police assistance shall be led by a PCO. All involved PNP personnel shall be in prescribed uniform when rendering police assistance.




4) Role of PNP Personnel Rendering Police Assistance

     The role of the PNP when rendering police assistance shall be limited to the maintenance of peace and order, crowd control, and the security of the duly authorized officer of the DAR who has the responsibility in implementing the decision/order/resolution/CLOA or leading the conduct of the preliminary agrarian activity. The aforementioned duly authorized officer shall have the final disposition whether to proceed or not with the implementation.

     No PNP member shall participate in the implementation of the decision/order/resolution/CLOA or in the conduct of any of the preliminary agrarian activities. The PNP personnel shall always respect human rights, observe maximum tolerance and exercise utmost impartiality and neutrality. The use of reasonable force shall only be resorted for self-defense and in defense of strangers.

5) When Entry to the Property is Refused by the Landowner

     In the implementation of final orders or in the conduct of preliminary agrarian activities, the authority to break into the property or into a building shall be specifically provided in the order/resolution to be implemented. Original or authenticated copy of such shall be attached in the written request for police assistance and the authority to break into subject property shall be specified.

     Likewise, the authority of the implementing team to forcibly break out and liberate themselves in case denied exit from the property shall also be specified in the order/resolution.

     When the DAR implementing team is denied entry into the property, the PNP personnel shall not directly participate in the conduct of forcible entry into the said property.

f. During the Implementation of Decisions/Orders of the Court, Quasi- judicial or Administrative Bodies that are Immediately Executory

1) This rule sets forth the procedure in the granting of police assistance in the implementation of decisions/orders that are immediately executory such as, but not limited to the following:

a) Temporary Restraining Order




b) Writ of Preliminary Injunction

c) Replevin

d) Writ of Preliminary Attachment

e) Receivership

f) Provisional Remedies under the Human Security Act

g) Temporary Protection Order under the Anti-Violence Against Women and their Children Act

h) Protection Order under the Anti-Child Pornography Act; and

i) Analogous cases

2) Where to File

     Decisions/Orders issued by the court, quasi-judicial or administrative bodies that are immediately executory shall be submitted to the RD of the PRO having jurisdiction of the place where the decision/order shall be implemented. Given the urgency of the matter, the RD, PRO shall be the approving authority. The request for police assistance, however, shall only be acted, upon the submission of the written request of the Sheriff or equivalent officer in quasi-judicial or administrative bodies, accompanied by the original or authenticated copy of the decision/ order/writ sought to be implemented.

3) Role of PNP Personnel Rendering Police Assistance

     PNP personnel shall always observe maximum tolerance and respect for human rights. Dialogue with those who may be affected by the implementation of the decision/order/resolution is encouraged to prevent violence. The assistance of local public officials, when warranted, should be requested. However, the Sheriff or the equivalent officer of quasi-judicial or administrative bodies shall have the final disposition whether to proceed or not with the implementation. The use of reasonable force shall only be resorted for self-defense and in defense of strangers.




Rule 6 Investigation Operations


6.1 Conduct of Crime Scene Investigation

     The CSI starts from the arrival of the PNP First Responders (FRs) to the arrival of the Duty Investigator/ IOC and the SOCO-LS Team until the lifting of the security cordon and release of the crime scene. (Standard Operating Procedure No. ODIDM-2011-008 "Conduct of Crime Scene Investigation")

a. Specific Functions, Responsibilities and Procedures

     The following are the functions and responsibilities of the investigators during the CSI, as well as the procedures to be observed:

1) First Responders

a) Assess whether the situation still poses imminent danger and call for back up if necessary.

b) Immediately conduct a preliminary evaluation of the crime scene. This evaluation should include the scope of the incident, emergency services required, scene safety concerns, administration of life-saving measures, and establishment of security and control of the scene;

c) Promptly inform the immediate commander on any updates
of the situation;

d) Save and preserve lives by giving the necessary first-aid measures to the injured and their medical evacuation as necessary. They shall likewise secure and preserve the crime scene by cordoning off the area to prevent unauthorized entry of persons;

e) Take the dying declaration or statement of severely injured
person/s. (Annex "HH").

f) Make the initial assessment on whether a crime has actually been committed and shall conduct the preliminary interview




of persons of interest and witnesses to determine what and
how the crime was committed;

g) Arrest the suspect if present in the area; and

h) Turnover the crime scene to the duty investigator/IOC upon his/her arrival after he/she has been briefed of the situation. The FR shall prepare and submit the First Responders Report (Annex "II") to the IOC and assist him/her until the investigation is completed and temporarily turned over to the local COP for the continuance of crime scene security.

2) Investigator-On-Case (IOC)

a) Make a thorough assessment of the crime scene based on
the briefing of the FR;

b) Assume full control and responsibility over the crime scene and conduct inquiry into the incident. If necessary, the IOC may extend the search outside of the crime scene;

c) Request SOCO assistance from the PNP CL office through the station TOC if required (PNP Investigation Manual, 2011). If not, he/she may proceed with the CSI ensuring observance of the procedures in the collection and preservation of evidence and accomplishing CSI forms including Persons who entered the Crime Scene, Significant Persons Present at the Vicinity of the Crime Scene, Evidence Log, Crime Scene Sketch and Inventory of Evidence Collected (Annexes "JJ","JJ-1", "JJ-2", "JJ-3" and "JJ-4").

d) Present the written Request for the Conduct of SOCO (Annex "KK") to the SOCO TL. The SOCO Team shall not process the crime scene unless the request has been received indicating that the concerned police unit shall remain and provide all the necessary security and support to the SOCO Team during the whole process until after the crime scene is released; and

e) Brief the SOCO TL upon their arrival at the crime scene and jointly conduct the preliminary crime scene survey.




f) Coordinate with the PNP Legal Service for the filing of appropriate motion for the release and disposition of submitted evidence after the case is dismissed at the Prosecutor's Office or terminated or resolved by the Court.

3) SOCO

a) Respond only upon request through the Operations Center and after the IOC has already made the proper assessment of the crime scene. The SOCO Team shall not join any operations conducted by the local police or accompany the FRs or the IOC in going to the crime scene;

b) Conduct SOCO upon receipt of the request from the
concerned police unit;

c) Turn over the crime scene to the IOC/COP for security of the area, in case the SOCO Team temporarily suspends the processing. The COP shall be primarily responsible and accountable for securing the crime scene and ensuring its integrity until the return of SOCO Team and the conclusion of the CSI;

d) Perform the final crime scene survey together with the IOC and thereafter provide the IOC the initial results of the crime scene processing; and

e) Accomplish the Inventory of Evidence Collected Form (Annex "JJ-4") and furnish the IOC of copies of the same before leaving the crime scene.

4) Legal Officer

a) Make a determination through searching questions to the COP if the crime reported falls within the definition of Sensational Crime or Serious Election Related Incident (ERI) under PNP MC 2013-004.

b) Go to the crime scene involving Sensational Crime and Serious ERI and ensure that the applicable laws, rules and regulations during the CSI are observed.




c) Provide the necessary legal assistance in the preparation of complaint, affidavits and other pleadings that will be filed before the prosecutor's office.

b. Special SOCO Procedures

     In cases where the evidence gathered needs special processing due to significant or sensational cases, the specialists from the CL shall be requested.

1) In bombing cases, the EOD personnel should first clear the area prior to entry of the SOCO Team. The preliminary survey and crime scene processing shall be jointly conducted by EOD personnel, IOC and SOCO Team. All evidence collected must be pre-cleared by the EOD Team prior to disposition;

2) In suspected or reported chemical, biological, radiological or nuclear (CBRN) situations, the SOCO shall directly coordinate with the Special Rescue Team of the BFP and other appropriate government agencies.

3) In mass victim situation, the Regional/District SOCO who has jurisdiction over the area, in addition to their function, shall act as the FR to the Interim Disaster Victim Identification Task Group (IDVITG) of the PNP CL. The IDVITG shall immediately assess the forensic specialists needed to be deployed at the crime scene and relay the requirements to the PNP CL Headquarters.

4) The SOCO, in coordination with IOC, has motu proprio authority to direct all operating units involved in the police operation to submit their respective personnel for forensic examination, their service firearms for ballistic tests and other pieces of evidence involved to expedite the investigation of the case.

c. Policy Guidelines on Processing of Persons Present at the Crime Scene during Post-Incident Situations

     These policy guidelines prescribe the operational procedures in processing and handling persons present at the crime scene, be they the suspects, victims or witnesses. The aim is to clearly define police courses




of actions in dealing with persons who, for any reason and personal circumstance, are at the crime scene during post-incident situations.

     As soon as the perpetrators surrender, or when they are captured or arrested, the IC shall ensure that the following are accomplished:

1) Processing, Debriefing and Documentation:

a) Victims;

b) Perpetrators;

c) Witnesses; and

d) Key participants in the incident.

2) Venue of Processing, Debriefing and Documentation - Considering the instability of the situation, the safety of the responders and persons found at the scene of the crime, and the preservation of the place of incident, the venue of the processing, debriefing and investigation shall be at a neutral and secured place.

d. Release of the Crime Scene

1) The IOC shall decide on the release of the crime scene upon consultation with the SOCO Team Leader. He/she shall ensure that all pieces of potential evidence have been collected and appropriately documented. Any re-entry of the IOC or other investigative units into the crime scene after its release to the owner will require a Search Warrant issued by the Court;

2) The IOC shall accomplish the IOC/Investigator's CSI form (Annex
"LL") before the cordon shall be lifted;

3) The IOC or the COP shall turn-over the crime scene to the owner of the property or where the crime scene is a public place, to any local person in authority using the Release of the Crime Scene Form (Annex "MM");

4) The IOC shall accomplish and submit the Investigator's Report with all the required attachments to the COP within two days if practicable from the date of incident; and




5) The CSI Report shall be the first entry in the Case Folder for the
investigation of the incident.

6.2 Maintenance of Police Blotter

a. Police Blotter

    Each PNP operating unit/station shall maintain two separate police blotters:

1) Blue Blotter. Contains the daily registry of all crime incident reports, official summaries of arrest, and other significant events reported in a Police Station/Unit; and

2) Pink Blotter. Contains the daily registry of all crime incident reports involving Violence Against Women and Children, Trafficking in Person, and other Gender-Based Violence such as those provided for in PNP policies and Philippine laws.

b. Blotter Procedure

    Crime incidents, arrests or events/activities shall be recorded in the blotter book by the DO.

    If the report is a crime incident as verified by the DI, he/she shall accomplish the Incident Record Form (IRF) (Annex "NN") using Crime Information Reporting and Analysis System (CIRAS) from which the entry in the blotter book shall be extracted from.

    If the incident falls under the jurisdiction of the Katarungang Pambarangay, it shall al be recorded but indicated in disposition as referred to Barangay.

If the crime incident involves Children in Conflict with the Law (CICL),
always use a.k.a. or aliases when writing entries to blue blotter.

6.3 Judicial Affidavit Rule (A.M. No. 12-8-8-SC)

      This Rule shall apply to all actions, proceedings, and incidents requiring the reception of evidence before the court in place of the direct testimonies of witnesses in order to reduce the time needed for completing their testimonies.




a. Application of Rule to Criminal Actions

     This rule shall apply to all criminal actions where the maximum imposable penalty does not exceed six years.

b. Contents of Judicial Affidavit (Annex "OO")

     A Judicial Affidavit shall be prepared in the language known to the witness and, if not in English or Filipino, accompanied by a translation in English or Filipino, and shall contain the necessary data/information.

1) The name, age, residence or business address, and occupation
of the witness;

2) The name and address of the lawyer who conducts or supervises the examination of the witness and the place where the examination is being held;

3) A statement that the witness is answering the questions asked of him/her, fully conscious that he/she does so under oath, and that he/she may face criminal liability for false testimony or perjury;

4) Questions asked of the witness and his/her corresponding answers, consecutively numbered, that:

a) Show the circumstances under which the witness acquired
the facts upon which he/she testifies;

b) Elicit from him/her those facts which are relevant to the
issues that the case presents; and

c) Identify the attached documentary and object evidence and establish their authenticity in accordance with the Rules of Court;

5) The signature of the witness over his/her printed name; and

6) A jurat or a proof that an oath was taken before an Administering
officer or a notary public.




c. Sworn Attestation of the Lawyer

     The judicial affidavit shall contain a sworn attestation at the end, executed by the lawyer who conducted or supervised the examination of the witness, to the effect that:

1) He/she faithfully recorded or caused to be recorded the questions he/she asked and the corresponding answers that the witness gave; and

2) Neither he/she nor any other person then present or assisting him/ her coached the witness regarding the latter's answers.

6.4 Custodial Investigation

a. Duties of the Police during Custodial Investigation (RA 7438 sec. 2)

1) The arresting officer, or the investigator, as the case may be, shall ensure that a person arrested, detained or under custodial investigation shall, at all times, be assisted by counsel, preferably of his own choice;

2) The arresting officer, or the investigator, as the case may be, must inform the person arrested, detained or under custodial investigation of the following rights under RA 7438 and RA 9745 in a language or dialect known to and understood by him/her, that:

a) He/she has the right to remain silent. If he/she waives his/her right to remain silent, anything he/she says can be used in evidence against him/her in court;

b) He/she has the right to counsel of his/her own choice. If he/she cannot afford one, he/she shall be provided with an independent and competent counsel;

c) He/she has the right to demand physical examination by an independent and competent doctor of his/her own choice, before and after interview/questioning. If the person arrested is a female, she shall be attended to preferably by a female doctor. If he/she cannot afford one, he/she shall be provided




with a competent and independent doctor to conduct physical
examination;

d) The State shall endeavour to provide him/her with psychological evaluation if available under the circumstances (RA 9745 sec. 12).

e) He/she, including his/her immediate family, have the right to immediate access to proper and adequate medical treatment; and

f) He/she has the right to be informed of such rights.

3) If the person arrested, detained, or under custodial investigation opted to give a sworn statement (Annex "PP"), the arresting officer, or the investigator, as the case may be, must reduce it in writing and in the presence of his/her counsel.

4) The arresting officer must ensure that, before the sworn statement is signed, or thumb marked, if there is inability to read and to write, the document shall be read and adequately explained to the person arrested, detained or under custodial investigation by his/ her counsel of choice, or by the assisting counsel provided to him/ her, in the language or dialect known to him/her;

5) The arresting officer, or the investigator, as the case may be, must ensure that any extrajudicial confession made by a person arrested, detained or under custodial investigation shall be:

a) In writing;

b) Signed by such person in the presence of his/her counsel; or

c) In the latter's absence, upon a valid waiver, and in the presence of any of the parents, elder brothers and sisters, his/her spouse, the municipal mayor, the municipal judge, district school supervisor, priest, imam or religious minister chosen by him/her.




     Failure of the arresting officer, or the investigator, to observe the above-mentioned procedures shall render the extrajudicial confession inadmissible as evidence in any proceeding; and

6)  The arresting officer, or the investigator, as the case may be, must, under established regulations, allow the person arrested, detained, or under custodial investigation visits by or conferences with any member of his/her immediate family, any medical doctor, priest, imam or religious minister chosen by him/her or by any member of his/her immediate family or by his/her counsel, or by any local NGO duly accredited by the Commission on Human Rights (CHR) or by any international NGO duly accredited by the Office of the President. His/her "immediate family" shall include his/her spouse, parent or child, brother or sister, grandparent or grandchild, uncle or aunt, nephew or niece, guardian or ward, and fianc or fiance (RA 7438 sec. 2 f) ;

b. Persons Under Police Custody (PUPC)

     The following are the policies and procedures in the admission, visitation, transfer and release of Persons Under Police Custody (PUPC) (PNP Memorandum Circular 2018-027):

1) Admission

     The pertinent data of the PUPC shall be encoded in the e-Rogues and other NGIS as applicable.

The following can be detained/admitted in PNP custodial facilities:

a) Accused covered by a Warrant of Arrest or a Commitment
Order issued by the court; and

b) Arrested suspects who are under custodial investigation. However, under no circumstances should the arrested suspects under custodial investigation be held in custodial facilities beyond the prescribed reglementary period, unless, while in custody, appropriate charges have been filed and




Commitment Order has been issued by the court concerned or he/she signed the required waiver of the rights under the provisions of Article 125 of the RPC.

2) Requirements for Admission

     In situations where the arresting police unit has no existing custodial facility, they may request admission of the PUPC to another police unit, provided that they submit the following mandatory requirements:

a) Request for custody or Commitment Order;

b) Proof of medical examination or medical certificate of the PUPC; and

c) Case folder of the PUPC containing, among others, the accomplished booking sheet.

3) Segregation of PUPC

Segregation according to gender and classification of crimes
committed by PUPC shall be observed.

4) Visitation

     Visitorial rights of a PUPC shall be subject to the following conditions:

a) Security rules and regulations of the facility such as but not limited to:

(1) The number of visitors at any given time;

(2) Non-wearing of similar color with the PUPC's uniform;
and

(3) Prohibition on the use or possession of camera, video equipment, cellular phone and similar devices.

b) Presentation of public and/or pertinent documents to prove
relationship;




c) Prohibition of conjugal visits.

5) Transfer of Custody

a) Upon receipt of the Commitment Order from the court, the Chief, Custodial Facility shall coordinate with the issuing court to ascertain the validity of the order. Upon confirmation, he/she must coordinate with the receiving detention facility for the immediate transfer of custody; and

b) Prior to the transfer, the PUPC shall be subjected to medical examination by a PNP medical officer or, in his/her absence, any government physician.

6) Release

a) The Chief, Custodial Facility shall be the sole approving authority in releasing the PUPC.

b) Upon receipt of the Release Order from the court, the Chief, Custodial Facility shall coordinate with the issuing court to ascertain the validity of the order. Upon confirmation, he/she must coordinate with the arresting unit if there are other legal impediments to the release.

c) The Chief, Custodial Facility shall likewise check from the PNP e-Warrant System to determine if the PUPC to be released has other pending warrants of arrest.

d) If there are valid grounds for continuous detention, the Chief, Custodial Facility shall inform and coordinate with the court that issued the release order immediately or within five days from notice.

e) Prior to the official release of the PUPC, he/she must undergo another medical examination at any PNP Health Service unit or Rural Health Unit.

f) The Chief, Custodial Facility shall coordinate with the
arresting officer for the release of all the properties seized




from the PUPC, except for those items still being used as evidence and those forfeited in favor of the government.

c. Transporting of PUPC

1) The PUPC must be properly escorted and handcuffed at all times and seated/positioned in the vehicle in a manner that prevents his/ her escape and deny him/her the opportunity to endanger the lives of PNP personnel. Female PUPC shall be escorted by a police woman;

2) The transport of PUPC shall be done using official PNP vehicles. Other vehicles may be utilized subject to the approval of the head of the concerned unit;

3) PUPCs shall as much as possible be transported wearing PUPC's
uniform or proper attire that may identify them as PUPCs;

4) Transport of PUPC shall be limited only to the following:

a) To the proper office for inquest, or court for hearing;

b) To the nearest hospital/clinic in case of the mandatory
medical examination or during actual medical emergency;

c) To the designated evacuation area exclusive for PUPCs
during a crisis situation;

d) During court-permitted transport; and

e) Other analogous circumstances

6.5 Instituting Criminal Actions

a. Inquest Procedures

1) The inquest proceedings shall commence upon the presentation of arrested person, unless his/her absence is justified, and witness/es by the police officer before the inquest prosecutor. The concerned police officer shall submit the following documents:




a) Case Referral signed by the Chief of Office (Annex "QQ");

b) Affidavit of Arrest (Annex "RR");

c) Statement(s) of the complainant(s) (Annex "SS");

d) Affidavit(s) of the witness(es) if any (Annex "TT"); and

e) Other supporting evidence gathered by law enforcement authorities during their investigation of the criminal incident involving the arrested person.

2) The investigator shall also ensure that the documents to be presented during the inquest proceedings shall comply with the guidelines and procedures provided in the existing investigation manuals and procedures, including but not limited to:

a) A.M. No. 21-06-08-SC (Rules on the Use of Body-Worn
Cameras in the Execution of Warrants and Warrantless Arrest);

b) PNP Criminal Investigation Manual 2011;

c) DOJ-NBI-PDEA-PNP Unified Manual in the Investigation and Prosecution of Anti-Illegal Drug Cases 2021;

d) Murder/ Homicide Investigation Manual;

e) Revised Standard Operating Procedure: Trafficking in Persons In Investigation Manual 2017;

f) Manual In Handling Children at Risk and Children in Conflict with the Law; or

g) Women And Children Protection Desk Investigator's Manual.

b. Waiver of Rights

     The inquest shall proceed unless the arrested person opts for a preliminary investigation by executing the required waiver of rights under Article 125 of the RPC (Annex "UU").




c. Preliminary Investigation and Direct Filing

1) Preliminary Investigation

    This is an inquiry or proceeding to determine whether there is sufficient ground to engender a well-founded belief that a crime has been committed and the respondent is probably guilty thereof and should be held for trial.

    It is required to be conducted by the Provincial or City Prosecutors and their assistants, National and Regional State Prosecutors; and other officers as may be authorized by law before the filing of a complaint or information for an offense where the penalty prescribed by law is at least four years, two months and one day without regard to the fine.

2) Direct Filing

     For all other offenses where preliminary investigation is not required, the concerned investigator may file the complaint directly with the Municipal Trial Courts and Municipal Circuit Trial Courts, or the complaint with the office of the prosecutor. In Manila and other chartered cities, the complaint shall be filed with the office of the prosecutor, unless otherwise provided in their charters.

     In the following instances, the concerned investigator shall file cases with the prosecutor's office thru regular filing when:

(a) The suspect has not been arrested but there is sufficient evidence to warrant the filing of the case; or

(b) When there was an arrest by virtue of a warrantless arrest pursuant to Rule 113, Section 5 of the Rules of Court, but the reglementary period to file the case has already lapsed

      The requirements stated in 6.6a shall likewise be complied with, as may be applicable.

d. Attendance to Court Duties

PNP personnel shall ensure that they dutifully attend court hearings.
The concerned subpoena court process officer from the PNP shall ensure the




attendance of the aforesaid PNP personnel by utilizing the PNP e-subpoena system (PNP MC 2014-016).

e. Monitoring of Cases by the Investigators

     After the investigators file the cases at the prosecutor's offices, they shall continuously monitor the case up to final resolution. They are also required to upload in the Case Information and Database Management System (CIDMS) all their case folders and the updates.


6.6 Investigation by the Local Police Unit After an Armed Confrontation

a. Responsibility of the Local Police Unit. The Police Unit that has territorial jurisdiction over the area where the armed confrontation occurred shall conduct threat assessment prior to response, secure and preserve the crime scene.

b. Processing of the Crime Scene. The concerned Police Unit shall immediately request the SOCO Team to conduct crime scene processing (PNP SOP ODIDM-2011-008).

c. Disposition of Firearms, Cartridges and Bullets Used, Seized, or Recovered in the absence of SOCO Team

1) After an armed confrontation resulting from any police operation, all firearms, cartridges and bullets seized or recovered, including those used by PNP personnel and other law enforcement agents in case of a joint operation, shall immediately be submitted with proper markings to the nearest CL office for examination procedures.

2) The IOC shall perform the following:

a) Personally submit the used, seized or recovered firearms, cartridges and bullets to the nearest CL Office;

b) Place all firearm evidence separately in properly labeled self- sealing plastic bags or appropriate similar containers;




c) Submit the photo of the firearm and the receipt issued by the nearest CL Office for the said firearms, cartridges and bullets to the prosecutor or the court (DOJ DC 67-2015); and

d) Request for a subpoena addressed to the firearms evidence custodian of the CL Office to present the firearms, cartridges and bullets, if their physical submission is required.

d. Disposition of Other Evidence Used, Seized or Recovered

     If there are explosives found after an armed confrontation, the operating unit shall seek the assistance of the EODT. Other evidence intended for examination, in the absence of SOCO, shall be properly marked and turned- over to the CL Office or other concerned PNP units.

e. Procedures to be Followed in Case Persons Died

     In cases of armed confrontation resulting in the death of suspects, victims, PNP personnel or other law enforcement agents, the location where the incident occurred shall be treated as a crime scene and the procedures in the conduct of CSI provided in Rule 6.1 of this POP shall be followed.

     The IAS shall also conduct, motu proprio, automatic investigation of incidents that resulted in the death of suspects or victims.

6.7 Procedures in the Investigation of Heinous and Sensational Crimes

a. Whenever a heinous or sensational crime is committed, the concerned COP or Station Commander shall immediately assess the situation and communicate with the DD/PD/CD the attendant circumstances and its updates which will be the basis of the DD/PD/CD for recommending to the RD whether there is a need to activate the Special Investigation Task Group (SITG).

b. Concerned COP or Station Commander shall base his/her assessment and recommendation on the report of the FRs and his/her assigned IOC. The creation of the SITG is not necessary for crimes that can be resolved at their level. Otherwise, a District/PPO/CPO level SITG shall be organized that will take cognizance of the investigation of heinous and sensational cases initially investigated by the City/Municipal/District Police Stations.




c. The creation of SITG and procedures to be followed shall be governed by the procedures in the investigation of heinous and sensational crimes provided in the PNP SOP Number 2012-003.

6.8 Investigation of Violence Against Women and Children (VAW/C) and other Gender-Based Violence (GBV)

a. Investigation of Complaints and Reports Involving All Forms of VAW/C and other GBV

      The PNP Women and Children Protection Desk (WCPD) shall conduct a timely, thorough, and comprehensive investigation of all cases involving VAW/C and other GBV such as those provided in the DIDM Investigative Directive 2016-09, the Women and Children Protection Desk Investigator's Manual and other subsequent related issuances consistent with domestic laws, rules and regulations, and International Human Rights standards. Any response must be child sensitive, gender-sensitive, rights- based and disability sensitive.

      The following investigation procedures shall be conducted by WCPD Investigators:

1) Upon the receipt of report/complaint, the WCPD Investigator shall conduct initial interview using the standard Incident Record Form (IRF) and record the incident in the pink blotter;

2) The WCPD Investigator shall determine the level of risk or safety issue of the victim and/or his/her family. If necessary, refer the victim-survivor to the Local Social Welfare and Development Office (LSWDO) or other support services/agencies for rescue, monitoring or welfare checks or application and enforcement of protection order.

3) The WCPD Investigator, whenever necessary, shall refer the victim-survivor to the nearest PNP CL Office or any hospital/ medical facility for appropriate medico-legal examination. As far as possible, the examining physician must be of the same sex as the victim-survivor, especially in sexual violence cases;

4) Only persons expressly authorized by the victim-survivor shall be allowed inside the room where police investigation




or medical/physical examination is being conducted, except when the victim-survivor is a child, where the presence of the unoffending parent or guardian and social worker is required;

5) Ensure the confidentiality of identity of the victim-survivor and all other parties directly involved with the case under investigation. For this purpose, the WCPD Investigator must record the same in the pink blotter. The media shall not be allowed any access to information concerning VAW/C and GBV reported to the PNP;

6) Upon the determination of the readiness of the victim to give statement, the WCPD Investigator shall conduct the victim- sensitive interview. Before documenting or recording the interview, the WCPD investigator shall secure the consent of the victim-survivor. If victim-survivor is a child, the accompanying social worker or non-offending guardian or parent/adult shall give the consent on behalf of the child.

7) The complaint, together with all relevant evidence, shall be referred to the Prosecutor's Office for appropriate legal action. The WCPD Investigator shall ensure the privacy of the victim- survivor and the confidentiality of the case at all times. The name and personal circumstances of the victim-survivor or any other information tending to establish his/her identity and that of his/her family shall not be disclosed to the public.

8) The WCPD Officer, in coordination with the territorial police unit, shall use all reasonable means to enforce a protection order to prevent further violence to the victim-survivor;

b. Rescue, Temporary Shelter and Protective Custody of Child Victim- Survivor

     The WCPD Investigator, in coordination with the LSWDO, shall investigate on all cases of child abuse committed within their respective area of responsibility, consistent with domestic laws, rules and regulations, and international human rights.

1) Any Police officer, upon receipt of a complaint or report or
information that a child has been or is being abused, maltreated,




exploited, neglected, or abandoned, or is under imminent danger of being abused or exploited, shall take immediate action thereon and coordinate with the WCPD Investigator, but under no circumstance shall be beyond 48 hours;

2) Any police officer, on a reasonable suspicion that a person is a victim of any offense defined under RA 9208 as amended by RA 10364, in coordination with WCPD, shall immediately place that person in the temporary custody of the LSWDO, or any accredited or licensed shelter institution devoted to protecting trafficked persons after the rescue;

3) Whenever the investigation shows evidence of labor exploitation or violation of labor standards involving a child, the WCPD investigator shall coordinate with the DOLE in the conduct of a rescue operation. A representative from the DOLE and LSWDO shall be invited as part of the rescue team.

4) In instances where the DOLE representative was not part of the rescue operation, the WCPD officer may file a petition/ application for the closure of establishment before the DOLE when there is evidence of worst form of child labor as provided for by Special Protection of Children Against Child Abuse, Exploitation and Discrimination Act (RA 9231 sec.12-d).

5) The WCPD Investigator shall ensure that the child shall not be subjected or exposed to revictimization during investigation.

c. Procedures in the Rescue of a Child

1) A rescue team, to be headed by the WCPD, shall be activated. They shall coordinate with representatives from LSWDO, Barangay Council for the Protection of Children (BCPC), and other concerned agencies for the conduct of rescue operations.

2) The rescue team shall formulate and execute the operational plan. All police officers participating in the rescue operations shall be in prescribed uniform. Only members of the team who will be in direct contact with the child shall be in plain clothes




to make the child feel comfortable. They must have a PNP
identification card to show when required.

3) Upon arrival at the place of rescue, the police officers shall secure the area and properly introduce themselves and inform the custodian of the child as to the purpose of their operation.

d. Procedures to be Observed in the Handling of Children at Risk (CAR), Children in Conflict with the Law (CICL) and Children Involved in Armed Conflict (CIAC)

     When handling a case involving a CAR, CICL, or CIAC, the PNP personnel shall keep in mind that the child has rights that has to be protected. He/she shall not threaten the child with any kind of violence or use vulgar language or allow the other concerned parties from doing the same. The parents/guardians of the CAR, CICL or CIAC shall be notified within eight hours from the time of the physical custody of the child and shall be referred to the appropriate agencies for the necessary intervention. The PNP personnel shall only use necessary and proportionate force to subdue a resisting child and where such force will only be used as a last resort. In no case shall the physical custody of the CAR, CICL or CIAC be retained in a custodial facility.

1) If the incident is involving CAR and CICL, the PNP personnel shall ensure observance of and adherence to the provisions of the Manual in Handling Cases of Children at Risk and Children in Conflict with the Law and the provisions of the Juvenile Justice and Welfare Act (RA 9344), as amended.

2) If the incident is involving CICL, the IOC, upon completion of the processing, shall ensure to turn over the custody of the child to the LSWDO or other accredited NGOs within eight hours after apprehension. However, in cases where the child is 15 years old or below, the IOC shall immediately release the child to the custody of the child's parents or guardian (RA 9344 sec. 21i)

3) If the incident is involving CIAC, the PNP personnel shall observe the provisions of RA 11188 on its implementing rules and regulations and the handling protocol on children in situations of armed conflict.





4) The CIAC shall not be criminally liable for crimes they committed as CIAC and shall be treated as victims. However, the protocol for the handling of cases of CICL shall apply when the acts committed by the CIAC are the following:

a) Grave child rights violations; or

b) Committed not as a child involved in armed conflict.

5) If the crime is cognizable by the WCPD as stated in the DIDM Investigative Directive 2016-09 and other related issuances, the WCPD shall investigate the case. In all other cases, investigation of the incident shall be made by the unit that has jurisdiction over the offense but the child who is CAR, CICL, or CIAC shall be processed by the WCPD.



Rule 7 Police Community Relations (PCR)


7.1 Essence of PCR

      PCR is indispensable in the PNP organization as it is geared towards forging a partnership with the community to promote a shared responsibility in addressing peace and order. A strong relationship between the police and the community establishes a harmonious and peaceful environment achieved through proper coordination and communication.

      PCR showcases its significance as being the first among equals in the quad concept of police operations because it fosters an environment conducive for effective crime prevention and solution efforts including other police activities.

7.2 General Guidelines

a. All personnel shall endeavor to manifest a character that enables him/ her to win the hearts and minds of the community and strive to establish and maintain a good relationship with them;




b. PCR activities shall aim towards addressing the various concerns on peace and order and public safety in the community. The proper conduct of PCR activities is essential in maintaining a positive public perception;

c. The community shall be informed on the PNP community-based programs and activities to gain support and address information gaps; and

d. The PNP awareness, organization and mobilization efforts shall take
into consideration the prevailing situation in the community.

7.3 Public Information

      This refers to the dissemination of information that may be of interest to the general public about policies, procedures, advisories, and events involving the PNP or other newsworthy accomplishments that are cleared for release.


a. Protocols in Releasing Information. Prior to the sharing of information, the following shall be performed:

1) Validate the accuracy and timeliness of the information;

2) Seek approval of the Unit Commander/Head of Office/authorized
representative who shall ensure that the information is:

a) Intended to empower and educate the community;

b) Purposive to the community safety and security to encourage them to participate in an information chain that reduces fear and eliminate the prevalence of crime;

c) Respectful of the privacy and dignity of an individual
particularly the victim of a crime; and

d) Not prejudicial to the safety and security of the state or an individual.

3) Release information only by authorized personnel through official
channels maximizing the use of TRIMP.




b. Media Relations Protocols

1) Observe courtesy and proper decorum and avoid arguments;

2) Never give unofficial or classified information. In cases when information may not be disclosed to the media, the basis for such shall be fully and courteously explained;

3) Press statements and PNP media lines shall be consistent with
established facts;

4) Suspect/s arrested for any violation of the law shall in no case be
presented in a "firing line" during press briefings;

5) As a general rule, the interview of PUPC by the media is prohibited. However, if the PUPC volunteers to be interviewed, he/she may be allowed to do so subject to existing rules and regulations of the custodial facility;

6) In cases of inter-agency operations, the department/agency with primary jurisdiction shall assume the responsibility in dealing with the media; and

7) All request for information shall be in consonance with the PNP People's Freedom of Information Manual.

c. Media Relations During Crisis

     The Crisis Communication Action Team (CCAT) (Annex "VV") shall be activated at the appropriate level to provide crisis communication strategies to manage issues with negative impact on the PNP and to inform the public to avoid fear and confusion of an ongoing critical development. It utilizes protocols for effective communication, particularly during a major threat or incident, to keep the community safe and secure.

The CCAT shall support the designated Public Information Officer (PIO)
of the established CIMTG at all levels and shall be guided by the following:

1) The CCAT, in coordination with the IC, is the only authorized group to release information to the media through the designated PIO of the CIMTG;




2) Media area for pooled coverage shall be situated from a safe distance and where, as far as practicable, the incident is not visible; and

3) Media shall be prohibited to cover actual police operations during human-induced crisis such as but not limited to hostage situations or any similar incidents.

d. Social Media Protocols

     These are policies that guide PNP personnel in using the social media particularly in sharing information. It promotes the responsible use of social media and ensures that PNP policies and laws of the state are observed. Social media posting of information shall adhere to the following:

1) Ensure that posts shall be based on facts;

2) Ensure that posts are approved by the Social Network Supervisor
and the Social Media Officer;

3) Ensure that classified matters/information about the PNP organization are not published; and

4) Ensure that posts on personal circumstances, tasks, and projects shall neither compromise any operation nor endanger the lives of personnel and stakeholders.

7.4 Information Development Operations (IDO)

      It is the development and application of means to influence the perception and decision-making of a specific Target Audience (TA) in support to the strategic communication of the government.

a. Three Classifications of IDO:

1) Offensive, which is the conduct of proactive measures on anticipated or emerging issues before it becomes a crisis;

2) Defensive, which refers to controlling the crisis or situation from
scaling; and




3) Extensive, which is a day-to-day routine of crafting and developing products that convey a strong message in the form of visual aids such as memes, infographics, informercials, and printed materials derived from facts and plain news.

b. Strategic Communication

    The IDO provides support for the Strategic Communication (StratCom) to orchestrate actions, words and images to achieve strategic goals and to advance the organization's interest, policies and objectives. The main objective of StratCom is to address real-time issues which affects the state of the nation. The following are the guidelines in carrying out StratCom:

1) PNP units shall have trained Police Community Affairs and Development (PCAD) officers to lead in carrying out PCAD activities and efforts;

2) Stratcom plans and activities shall be developed with achievable,
measurable and time-bound content;

3) StratCom shall be crafted in order to affect positively the thinking faculties and eventually the behaviors of the purposely predetermined TA;

4) TAs shall be classified as either internal or external to the PNP. This will aid the StratCom crafters to appropriately identify their plan of actions as well as the useful tools;

5) The themes and messages shall be produced in the form of words, actions, and images or a combination thereof specific to each classification of target audience and they can be expressed through the following channels using various IDOs; social media platforms; television; radio; and print (press release, leaflets, glossy sheets, broadsheets, tabloids, infographics, etc.)

7.5 Police Community Affairs and Development

      PCAD covers the awareness, organization, and mobilization of the community for crime prevention, lawlessness resistance and overall security of the area relative to peace and order, public safety, and development.




a. PCAD programs and activities shall be guided by the following:

1) There shall be trained PCAD personnel in all police stations to
lead the various PCAD programs and activities;

2) PCAD programs and activities shall be regularly conducted to
sustain the partnership and collaboration with the community;

3) There shall be social investigation/community study on the physical environment, economic status, lifestyle, cultural and socio-political standing, and others, necessary for program conceptualization to address societal/peace and order issues/problems in the community;

4) There shall be coordination, collaboration and cooperation with concerned government agencies, NGOs, and stakeholders in the conduct of various PCAD programs and activities;

5) PNP units shall initiate and assist in disaster relief operations, medical support operations, rescue operations, community- based education and training, and other urgent and non-urgent assistance;

6) Trained and organized groups shall serve as active partners and
force multipliers in the conduct of PCAD programs and activities;

7) PNP units/offices shall assess PCAD programs and activities through various tools including community feedback to determine their effectiveness; and

8) In certain situations where NGOs are involved in community organizing, PCAD personnel should understand that the NGOs' participation is purely voluntary.

b. Community Engagement and Awareness Procedures

1) Conduct Target Audience and Issue Analysis (TAIA) to assess the
priority concerns in the community;

2) Coordinate and collaborate with the barangay officials and other community leaders before the conduct of information dissemination drives to the identified TAs;




3) Serve as lecturer/resource speaker during community engagement
and awareness activities; and

4) Sustain the conduct of community engagement and awareness activities.

c. Community Organizing Procedures

1) Prepare a database/list of people in the community and their
significant roles;

2) Engage the community through seminar/lecture, pulong-pulong,
ugnayan sa barangay, and other information dissemination drives;

3) Form core groups and identify potential contacts and leaders in
each target community/sector to determine their concerns;

4) Conduct thorough validation and verification of intentions and requirements for accreditation of sectoral groups and other entities;

5) Conduct community/sector selection to determine and assess
what programs and activities are feasible;

6) Visit the local community/sector leaders to inform them of the
nature/objectives of programs and activities to be implemented;

7) Immerse and participate in social and economic activities to adapt
and familiarize oneself with the community/sector; and

8) Take the lead in the actual mobilization of organized groups.

d. Community Mobilization Procedures

1) Ensure that the organized groups to be mobilized must be trained/
capacitated based on their respective fields of interest;

2) Supervise the activities and participation of the organized groups
in various PCAD programs and activities;

3) Conduct briefing and debriefing with the organized groups in all PCAD programs and activities;




4) Ensure regular monitoring and assessment of the organized
groups in the community; and

5) Recognize/acknowledge	the	effort	and	participation	of	the
community and organized groups.

7.6 Gender and Development (GAD)

      GAD in the PNP organization is human rights-based and it is the responsibility of a police officer to protect and promote such rights. This recognizes that gender biases impede development because they prevent people from attaining the full potentials that enable them to become effective contributors to and beneficiaries of development. It is about adhering to the principle that development is for all.

      Fairness and equity demand that everyone in society, whether male or female, has the right to the same opportunities to achieve a full and satisfying life.

a. The Role of Police Officers as Advocates of GAD

    The PNP promotes women empowerment and pursues equal opportunities for men and women and ensures equal access to resources and development results and outcomes in the organization (RA 9710, 2009).

1) Deployment of Female Police During Operations

a) Ensure that a corresponding number of female police
personnel shall be included in the team;

b) Ensure that the same roles are performed within the gender
policies of equal work standard; and

c) Consider the health condition of pregnant police women.

2) Deployment Of WCPD Officers in Evacuation Areas

a) Ensure that male and female WCPD officers are deployed to assist the women and children in evacuation areas; and

b) Ensure availability of an interview/investigation room in the evacuation area for the protection of the victim's privacy during the interview.




3) Decent Custodial Facilities for Both Male and Female PUPCs

a) Ensure  that  custodial  facilities  are  compliant  with  the
international standards for jails and prisons;

b) Ensure separate custodial facilities and comfort rooms for
male and female PUPCs to avoid any form of abuse; and

c) Ensure that concerns of female PUPCs must be handled by female PNP duty guard as well.

4) Promotion of Gender Equality and Development

a) Advocate gender equality;

b) Use gender-fair language;

c) Provide equal opportunity to all gender;

d) Treat people equally;

e) Uphold equal justice for everyone;

f) Adhere strictly to human rights;

g) Avoid victim-blaming;

h) Stop violence against women and children and marginalized
sectors of the community;

i) Stop hate crime (color of skin, gender preference, economic
& social status); and

j) Do not discriminate.

7.7 Salaam Police (\suhlam\)

      Salaam Police Center (SPC) is established to foster better Police-Muslim Community relationships. Assigning dedicated PNP personnel, preferably Muslims, with the SPC provides a proactive and forward-looking response to promote law and order within Muslim communities taking into consideration indigenous cultures,




traditions, and institutions of the Muslims as well as building awareness about their rights and responsibilities as part of Filipino society.

      Physical presence of Salaam Police personnel is essential in cultivating community trust, thereby building and sustaining community support and engagement that will further build cooperative relationships between Muslims and the PNP.

a. Islamic Cultural and Religious Sensitivities

    Filipino Muslims, traditionally located in Mindanao, came from many cultural and ethnic backgrounds. They further spread in other parts of the country due to migration. However, there were negative issues concerning Muslims in the community, affecting relationships which become a law enforcement concern. It is therefore imperative for the PNP to understand their culture and sentiments to gain their trust and respect.

    All PNP personnel shall observe the following guidelines to preserve cultural and Islamic religious sensitivities (CMC 08-2021):

1) Bridge the culture gap with good communication skills;

2) Be respectful during interaction with Foreign Islamic Missionaries;

3) Practice good manners;

4) Honor and respect traditional holidays, festivals and food; and

5) Respect cultural differences.

b. Engagement with Muslim communities:

    All PNP personnel are encouraged to observe or respect these Muslim customs and traditions including but not limited to the following:

1) When addressing a religious leader, use formal religious titles
such as brother/sister or imam unless instructed otherwise;

2) When greeted by the Arabic salutation "As-salamu Alaikum" (peace be upon you), the response is "Wa Alaikum as Salaam" (and upon you be peace) and vice versa;





3) When interacting with Muslims of the opposite sex, do not initiate
handshakes or embrace unless offered;

4) When entering a mosque, prayer room or Islamic center, remove shoes as respect to their sacred space. If not wearing a PNP uniform, PNP personnel should dress modestly. Policewomen should cover their heads, arms, and legs. Ask permission before participating in religious worship services;

5) PNP personnel shall respect the Muslims' observance of the Holy Month of Ramadan. Regular duty schedules shall, as far as practicable, be flexible to accommodate Muslim PNP personnel who are fasting and rendering five ritual prayers daily. In engaging the Muslim community, schedules should be flexible and food/ drinks should not be served;

6) PNP personnel should be aware of Muslim religious dietary laws written in the Quran. These dietary laws are defined by the Arabic terms halal (permitted) and haram (prohibited).

7) As far as practicable, Muslim PNP personnel shall be given consideration with respect to Friday as the day of congregational prayer; and

8) PNP personnel should recognize the two important Islamic festivities, "Eid al Fit'r" and "Eid al Adha". A typical greeting to be observed for these holidays is "Eid Mubarak", which means blessed celebration.




SUMMARY OF CHANGES
	NEW PROCEDURES	
Use of Body Worn Camera Use of Force Policy
Procedures in the Conduct of Joint Checkpoints

High-Risk Stop and High-Risk Arrest (Maritime and Airport Settings)

Procedures for Responding PNP Personnel in Enforcing Quarantine Measures to Manage Health Hazards
Major Events Security Management Police Community Relations Procedures

	REVISED EXISTING PROCEDURES	
High-Risk Stop and High-Risk Arrest (General Settings) Police Defensive Roadblock





Rules on Anti-Illegal Drugs Operations


* Coordination Requirements (based on the Unified Coordination guidelines
PNP-PDEA)


* Handling, Custody and Disposition of Drug and Non-Drug Evidence (cop- ied from Unified Manual in the Investigation and prosecution of Drug Cas- es)

Rules on Anti-Kidnapping Operations

Internal Security Operations
* The PNP in an Active Support Role
* Law Enforcement Operations Against Terrorist Groups and other Threats to National Security
* Target Hardening

Public Safety Operations
* PNP Critical Incident Management Operational Procedures (CIMOP)
* Hostage Situation
* Bomb Threat and Bomb Incident Emergency Response

Investigation Operations
* Transporting of PUPC
* Inquest Procedures
* Investigation by the Territorial Police Unit After an Armed Confrontation
* Procedures in the Investigation of Heinous and Sensational Crimes
* Investigation of Violence Against Women and Children (VAW/C) and other Gender-Based Violence (GBV)




LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
ABA	-	Alcohol Breath Analyzer
ACG	-	Anti-Cybercrime Group
ACP	-	Advanced Command Post
AFIS	-	Automated Fingerprint Identification System
AFP	-	Armed Forces of the Philippines
AHJAG	-	Ad Hoc Joint Action Group
AKAT	-	Anti-Kidnapping Action Team
AKG	-	Anti-Kidnapping Group
AO	-	Arresting Officer
APEC	-	Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
ARDs	-	Alternative Recording Devices
ARO	-	Agrarian Reform Officer
ASEAN	-	Association of Southeast Asian Nations
ATC	-	Anti-Terrorism Council
ATOF	-	Authority to Operate Form
AVR	-	Audio and Video Recorder AVSEGROUP	-	Aviation Security Group BAC	-	Blood Alcohol Concentration
BCPC	-	Barangay Council for the Protection of Children
BFAR	-	Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources
BFP	-	Bureau of Fire Protection
BI	-	Bureau of Immigration
BPSO	-	Barangay Public Safety Officer
BWC	-	Body-Worn Camera
BWCs	-	Body Worn Cameras
CAR	-	Children at Risk
CARP	-	Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program
CBRN	-	Chemical, Biological, Radiological or Nuclear
CBRNE	-	Chemical, Biological, Radiological, Nuclear and Explosives
CCAT	-	Crisis Communication Action Team
CD	-	City Director




CDM	-	Civil Disturbance Management
CG	-	Criminal Group
CHR	-	Commission on Human Rights
CIAC	-	Children Involved in Armed Conflict
CICL	-	Child in Conflict with the Law
CIDMS	-	Case Information and Database Managament System
CIMC	-	Critical Incident Management Committee
CIMOP	-	Critical	Incident	Management	Operational Procedures
CIMTG	-	Crisis Incident Management Task Group
CIRAS	-	Crime Information Reporting Analysis System
CIRF	-	Critical Incident Response Force
CL	-	Crime Laboratory
CPO	-	City Police Office
CLOA	-	Certificate of Land Ownership Award
CMC	-	Crisis Management Committee
COC	-	Certificate of Coordination
COMELEC	-	Commission on Elections
COP	-	Chief of Police
CPEC	-	Controlled Precursor and Essential Chemical
CPNP	-	Chief, Philippine National Police
CSI	-	Crime Scene Investigation
DA	-	Department of Agriculture
DAR	-	Department of Agrarian Reform
DDB	-	Dangerous Drugs Board
DENR	-	Department	of	Environment	and	National Resources
DEU	-	Drug Enforcement Units
DI	-	Duty Investigator as used in Rule 2.6 Booking of arrested suspect
DI	-	Directorate for Intelligence
DILG	-	Department of Interior and Local Government
DIPO	-	Directorate for Integrated Police Operations




DO	-	Desk Officer
DOJ	-	Department of Justice
DOLE	-	Department of Labor and Employment
DVR	-	Digital Video Recording
EO	-	Election Officer
EO	-	Executive Order
EOD/K9	-	Explosive Ordnance Disposal/K9
ERI	-	Election Related Incident (as used in Rule 6)
ERI	-	Explosives and Related Incidents
FED	-	Firearms and Explosive Division
FLD	-	Foreign Liaison Division
FR	-	First Responder
GAD	-	Gender and Development
GCMS	-	Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectroscopy
GBV	-	Gender-Based Violence
HHQ	-	Higher Headquarters
HNT	-	Hostage Negotiation Team
IATA	-	International Air Transport Association
IC	-	Incident Commander
ICAO	-	International Civil Aviation Organization
ICP	-	Incident Command Post
ICPO	-	International Criminal Police Organization
ICS	-	Incident Command System
ICT	-	Information and Communication Technology
IDM	-	Investigation and Detection Management
IDO	-	Information Development Operations
IDVITG	-	Interim Disaster Victim Identification Task Group
IED	-	Improvised Explosive Device
INTERPOL	-	International Police
IOC	-	Investigator-on-case
IRF	-	Incident Record Form
ISO	-	Internal Security Operation
KFR	-	Kidnap-for-Ransom
LCE	-	Local Chief Executives




LEA	-	Law Enforcement Agency
LESTF	-	Local Event Security Task Force
LGU	-	Local Government Units
LPS	-	Local Police Stations
LSWDO	-	Local Social Welfare and Development Office
LTO	-	Land Transportation Office
MACC	-	Multi-Agency Coordination Center
MG	-	Maritime Group
MPS	-	Municipal Police Station
MRF	-	Medical Reserve Force
MTC	-	Municipal Trial Court
NBI	-	National Bureau of Investigation
NDRRMC	-	National and Local Disaster Risk Reduction
and  Management Council
NGIS	-	Next Generation Investigation Solution
NGO	-	Non-Governmental Organizations
NOC	-	National Organizing Committee (as used in Rule 5)
NOC	-	Negotiation Operation Center
NPOC	-	National and Local Peace and Order Council
NPS	-	National Prosecution Service
NSU	-	National Support Unit
PA	-	Public Address
PBDC	-	Philippine Bomb Data Center
PBI	-	Post-Blast Investigation
PCAD	-	Police Community Affairs and Development
PCG	-	Philippine Coast Guard
PCO	-	Police Commissioned Officer
PCP	-	Police Community Precinct
PD	-	Provincial Director
PDEA	-	Philippine Drug Enforcement Agency
PDEG	-	PNP Drug Enforcement Group
PIO	-	Public Information Officer
PN	-	Philippine Navy




PNP	-	Philippine National Police
POP	-	Police Operational Procedures
PPO	-	Police Provincial Office
POC	-	Peace and Order Councils
PPE	-	Personal Protective Gear
PRO	-	Police Regional Office
PSG	-	Presidential Security Group
PUPC	-	Persons under Police Custody
RA	-	Republic Act
PNCO	-	Police Non-Commissioned Officer
RD	-	Regional Director
ROC	-	Regional Operation Center
RPC	-	Revised Penal Code
RSSF	-	Reactionary Support and Standby Force
RTC	-	Regional Trial Court
SCDM	-	Sub-Committee on Disaster Management
SMS	-	Short Messaging System
SOCO	-	Scene of the Crime Operations
SONA	-	State of the Nation Address
SOUs	-	Special Operation Units
SITG	-	Special Investigation Task Group
SPC	-	Salaam Police Center
STF	-	Special Task Force
Stratcom	-	Strategic Communication
TA	-	Target Audience
TAIA	-	Target Audience and Issue Analysis
TDCO	-	The Deputy Chief PNP for Operations
TDIDM	-	The Director for Investigation and Detective Management
TDO	-	The Director for Operations
TF	-	Task Force
TG	-	Task Groups (as used in Rule 5)
TG	-	Terrorists Groups
TIIR	-	Technical Inspection and Inventory Receipt




TL	-	Team leader
TOC	-	Tactical Operations Center
TOP	-	Temporary Operator's Permit
TRIMP	-	TV, radio, internet, messaging and print media
TU	-	Task Units
TVR	-	Traffic Violation Receipt
VAWC	-	Violence against Women and Children
VSA	-	Vehicle Screening Area
VVIPS	-	Very Very Important Persons
WCPD	-	Women's and Children's Protection Desks




LIST OF TABLES


Table 1.1 - Non-Lethal Approach Table 1.2 - Less Lethal Approach Table 1.3  -   Lethal Approach
Table 3.1  -    Human-Induced Escalation Protocols

Table 3.2  -    Natural Disaster Escalation Protocols




GLOSSARY OF TERMS

Abduction - the elements constituting the crime of abduction are: (1) the person kidnapped must be a woman; It is immaterial if she is a widow, a married woman, or virgin, as all three classes are comprised within the generic term of "woman";
(2) The crime must be committed against her will; (3) It must be committed with
unchaste designs, that is, with the intention of lying with the woman.

Accreditation - process of granting recognition to an organization that had passed
or complied with the requirements or standard set forth by the accrediting office.

Affidavit - summary judgment. The kind of affidavit necessary to support a summary judgment is that affidavit from which it may be clearly drawn that certain facts pleaded by either party are certain, undisputed and indubitable which dispense with the hearing or trial of the case.

AFIS (Automated Fingerprint Identification System) - is the PNP Crime Laboratory's computerized system that captures, matches, compares identifies and verifies stored digitized fingerprints.

Airport - any area which is open for commercial aircraft operations.

Airport Security Program - Written measures adopted to safeguard international civil aviation against acts of unlawful interference.

Alleged - the word "alleged" or "allegedly" connotes something "claimed". It leaves
the truth of the averment an open question.

Alternative Recording Device - an electronic camera system which is not a body- worn camera, that is capable of creating, generating, sending, receiving, storing, displaying, and processing audio-visual recordings, and may be worn during law enforcement activities. It may be used as a substitute for body-worn cameras in case of unavailability.




Ambassador - a person who have been appointed as chief of mission and have served as Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary.

Arrest - it is the taking of a person into custody in order that he may be bound to
answer for the commission of an offense.

Arson - is defined as the intentional or malicious destruction of a property by fire. It is also defined as the criminal burning of property.

Assault - the term "assault" in Sec. 87 (b) (2), Judiciary Act, on the original jurisdiction of Municipal Courts, means physical injuries. It does not refer to the crime of direct assault in Art. 148 of the Revised Penal Code.

Attempt - Intent is a quality of the mind and implies a purpose only, while attempt
implies an effort to carry that purpose into execution.

Authority - a person or persons, or a body, exercising power or command; for
those upon whom the people have conferred authority.

Bag and Tag - process of identifying, labelling and securing electronic devices seized from cybercrime scene.

Bail - the word "bail" as used in the prohibition against excessive bail is inadequately translated by the word "fianza", as bail implies a particular kind of bond that is to say, a bond given to secure the personal liberty of one held in restraint upon a criminal or quasi criminal charge.

Body-Worn Camera (BWC) - an electronic camera system designated to law enforcement units for creating, generating, sending, receiving, storing, displaying, and processing audio-visual recordings that may be worn during law enforcement activities. Body-Worn Camera  An electronic camera system designated to law enforcement units for creating, generating, sending, receiving, storing, displaying, and processing audio-visual recordings that may be worn during law enforcement activities.




Bomb - a bomb is a container filled with explosive, incendiary material, smoke, gas, or other destructive substance, designed to explode. It can appear obvious or concealed and it can vary in size, shape sophistication and may not necessarily explode such as in the case of incendiary and dirty bombs. It may be referred to as improvised explosives device (IED) or ordnance.

Bomb Incident Emergency Response - a systematic reaction performed wherein render safe procedures and/or techniques are applied by certified bomb technicians to prevent or mitigate the functioning of a hazardous device/material and respond to all forms of explosive related incidents.

Bomb Threat - is either a written or verbal threat communicated through electronic, oral or other means that threatens to place or use an IED at a certain time, date or place against any person or place.

Bombing - Any incident which uses a device constructed with criminal intent and using high explosives, low explosives, or blasting agents explodes. This term also refers to incidents where premature detonation occurs during preparation, transportation, or placement of a constructed device.

Buy Bust Operation - is an entrapment technique employed by a peace officer as an effective way of apprehending a criminal in the act of the commission of the offense.

Calamity - an event that brings terrible loss, lasting distress, or severe affliction.

Canine (K9) - a dog, "canis familiaris", more commonly used as an explosive
detection working dog and sometimes abbreviated as k9.

Chain of Custody - the duly recorded authorized movements and custody of seized drugs or controlled precursors and essential chemicals or plant sources of dangerous drugs or laboratory equipment at each stage, from the time of seizure/ confiscation to receipt in the forensic laboratory to safekeeping to presentation in court and destruction. Such record, of movements and custody of seized item shall include the identity and signature of the person who held temporary custody of the seized item, the dates and times when such transfers of custody were made in the course of safekeeping and use in court as evidence and the final disposition.




Chief Custodial Facility - shall be the head of offices, units or stations.

Child/Children - shall refer to a person below 18 years of age or one over said age and who, upon evaluation of a qualified physician, psychologist or psychiatrist, is found to be incapable of taking care of himself fully because of a physical or mental disability or condition or of protecting himself from abuse as defined under RA 7610. In relation to RA 9262, it includes the biological children of the victim and other children under her care.

Child Abuse - refers to the infliction of physical or psychological injury, cruelty to
or neglect, sexual abuse or exploitation of a child.

Child in Conflict with the Law (CICL) - refers to a child who is alleged as, accused
of, or adjudged as, having committed an offense under Philippine laws.

Child at Risk (CAR) - refers to a child who is vulnerable to and at the risk of committing criminal offenses because of personal, family and social circumstances, such as, but not limited to, the following:
* being abused by any person through sexual, physical, psychological, mental, economic or any other means and the parents or guardian refuse, are unwilling, or, unable to provide protection for the child;
* being exploited including sexually or economically;
* being abandoned or neglected, and after diligent search and inquiry, the
parent or guardian cannot be found;
* coming from a dysfunctional or broken family or without a parent or
guardian;
* being out of school;
* being a street child;
* being a member of a gang;
* living in a community with a high level of criminality or drug abuse;
* living in situations of armed conflict; and
* being in any other similar situation.

Child Involved in Armed Conflict (CIAC) - refers to a child who participated directly in armed hostilities through support roles such as scouts, spies, saboteurs, decoys, checkpoint assistants, couriers, messengers, porters, cooks or as sexual objects.




Children in Conflict with the Law (CICL) Cases - cases involving crimes committed by minors which are initially taken cognizance of, by the police but later referred to other government agencies for counselling diversion program, as provided by RA No. 9344 (Juvenile Justice Welfare Act);

Clerk of Court - an officer of a court of justice who has charge of the clerical part of its business, who keeps its record and seal, issues process, enters judgment and orders, gives certified copies from the records and the like. While the clerk of court belongs to the judicial as distinguished from the executive or legislative branch of government, his office is essentially a ministerial one.

Complainant - a party or person who makes a complaint or file a formal charge in
the court of law.

Complaint - a concise statement of the ultimate facts constituting the plaintiff's
cause or causes of action.

Confession - It is an express acknowledgment by the accused in a criminal prosecution of the truth of his guilt as to the offense charged, while admission refers to statements of fact not directly constituting an acknowledgment of guilt.

Consequence Management - shall refer to as the coordinating measures taken in order to react and to reduce the impact of the effects of a security related incident, in particular resulting from terrorist attacks, disasters, catastrophes and accidents. To ensure a smooth coordination of crisis management and security actions.

Contact Tracing - identification and diagnosis of persons who may have come into contact with an infected person. It plays an important role in containing outbreaks of infectious diseases. The main purposes of contact tracing are to: (1) confirm diagnosis; (2) determine the extent of secondary transmission; and (3) identify appropriate control measures for the specific diseases.

Contacts - person who have had exposure (lived with, worked with, or cared for)
exposure to a confirmed case.




Contingency Plan - a proactive plan to include measures and procedures addressing various threat levels, risk assessments and the associated security measures to be implemented, designed to anticipate and mitigate events as well as prepare all concerned parties having roles and responsibilities in the event of an actual act of unlawful interference. A contingency plan sets forth incremental security measures that may be elevated as the threat increases. It may be a stand- alone plan or included as part of a Crisis Management Plan.

Contraband - a generic term covering all goods exported from or imported into the country contrary to applicable statutes.

Corpus Delicti - Latin for the "body of the crime" It is the legal term used to describe/ physical/or material evidence that a crime has been committed such as the corpse of a murder victim or the cleaned of a torched building. It is used to refer to the underlying principle that, without evidence of a crime having been committed, it would be unjust to convict someone.

Crime Information, Reporting and Analysis System (CIRAS) - formerly the e- Blotter system that sets a standard procedure by which all crime incidents reported to the police stations are electronically stored in a database. The system does not only facilitate crime documentation and storage but also presents a quick, fast, and reliable transmission of crime information from a particular police station to the National Headquarters at Camp BGen Rafael T Crame, Quezon City.

Crime Scene - a venue or place where the alleged crime/incident/event has been committed.

Crime Scene Investigation - is the conduct of processes more particularly the recognition, search, collection, handling, preservation and documentation of physical evidence to include identification of witnesses and arrest of suspect at the crime scene.

Crimes - acts or omissions that are violations of the RPC and offenses which are
violation of Special Laws.




Criminal Case - an incident which, after investigation, developed into a crime after undergoing the due process requirements of the Philippine constitution, the Philippine criminal justice system, the rules of criminal procedure and the rules of evidence.

The essential requisites/components of a criminal "case" are:
* A crime committed;
* An offended (victim);
* An offender (overt actor);
* An information (for public crimes) or a complaint (for private crimes) filed in court;
* 	A court of competent jurisdiction that issued, after a preliminary examination called judicial determination of probable cause, an order of commitment (after inquest proceedings), or a warrant of arrest (after
regular preliminary investigation). If the crime does not reach the court for trial on the merits, there is no case.

Criminal Investigation - it is the collection of facts in order to accomplish the three-fold aims to identify the guilty party; to locate the guilty party; and to provide evidence of his (suspect) guilt.

Criminal Liability - Requisites. Under Art.4 par. 1 RPC, a person may be held criminally liable even if the injurious result be greater than that intended, provided these requisites concur: 1) an intentional felony has been committed; and 2) the wrong done to the victim be the direct, natural, and logical consequence of the felony committed.

Critical Incident - is any emergency event, whether man-made or natural, that requires the implementation of special tasks by one or more of the urgent services of the government and will generally include the involvement, either directly or indirectly, of the Philippine National Police. It is a crucial and rapid intervention point at the acute phase of a crisis.

Custodial Facilities - formerly known as "detention facilities," are facilities within
PNP premises that are used to hold arrested persons under custodial investigation.




Custodial Investigation - investigation conducted by law enforcement officers after a person has been arrested or deprived of his freedom of action. It includes invitation to a person who is being investigated in connection with an offense.

Cyber or Cybercrime Warrants - are warrants issued by the courts relating to the disclosure, interception, search, seizure, and/or examination, as well the custody, and destruction of computer data, as provided for under RA 10175 and the Supreme Court Rule on Cybercrime Warrants.

Cybercrime - refers to a crime committed through special knowledge of computer technology or any crime committed using computer as a tool.

Cyber - refers to a computer or a computer network, the electronic medium in
which online communication takes place;

Data Custodian - PNP personnel who has the sole responsibility of storing and safekeeping data recorded from body-worn cameras.

Destabilization - are threats posed by the destabilizers which include military uprisings, sabotage of key installations, etc., or a combination thereof, undertaken separately or jointly by anti-government forces from the left and the right of the political spectrum. These critical incidents, backed oftentimes by disgruntled uniformed personnel and politicians with vested interests, are undertaken primary to undermine the present leadership, thereby rendering it unstable and incapable of effective governance or surviving with the end in view of averting the status quo to replace the government.

Detention - a restraint of personal liberty or deprivation of freedom of action in any
significant manner.

Disaster - an exceptional, damaging or destructive event which causes serious loss, destruction, hardship, unhappiness, injuries or deaths.

Disaster Incident - refers to serious disruption of the functioning of a community or a society involving widespread human, material, economic or environmental losses and impacts, which exceeds the ability of the affected community or society to cope using its own resources. Disaster is often described as a result of the




combination of the exposure to a hazard; the conditions of vulnerability that are present; and insufficient capacity or measures to reduce or cope with the potential negative consequences. Disaster impacts may include loss of life, injury, disease and other negative effects on human, physical, mental and social well-being, together with damage to property, destruction and environmental degradation.

Dragnet Operation - is a police operation purposely to seal-off the probable exit points of fleeing suspects from the crime scene to prevent their escape.

Dying Declaration - Requisites. In order that a dying declaration may be admissible, the following requisites must concur; 1) it must concern the crime involved in and the circumstances surrounding the declarant's death; 2) at the time of the declaration, the declarant must be conscious of impending death; 3) the declarant must be competent as a witness; and 4) the declaration must be offered in a criminal case for homicide, murder, or parricide in which the declarant was the victim.

Engagement - the act of allowing one to be involved in a certain issue or conversation that will lead to exchange of information or interest.

Evidence - the means sanctioned by the Rules of Court, of ascertaining in a judicial proceeding the truth respecting a matter of fact. These include but are not limited to documentary, testimonial, electronic and object evidence, gathered in the course of the investigation.

e-Warrant - is a system where all warrants of arrest are electronically stored and documented so that they can be accessed through the internet by all police units nationwide.

Exploitation - shall include, at the minimum, child prostitution, child pornography and other forms of sexual exploitation, child labor, force labor or services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, servitude, removal and sale of organs, use in illicit/illegal activities, and participation in armed conflict. The hiring, employment, persuasion, inducement, or coercion of a child to perform in obscene exhibitions and indecent shows, whether live or in video or film or to pose or act as a model in obscene publications or pornographic materials, or to sell or distribute said materials.




Explosive - a reactive substance that contains a great amount of potential energy that when initiated can produce an explosion, usually accompanied by the production of light, heat, sound and pressure. The term includes, but it is not limited to low and high explosives, propellants, pyrotechnics, igniters, initiators, primary, secondary and tertiary explosives.

Explosive Component - is a solid or a liquid which, upon application or heat or shock, breaks down very rapidly into gaseous products, with an accompanying release of heat energy.

Explosive Detection Dog (EDD) - PNP k9 used during detection of explosive substance.

Explosive Incident Response Team (EIRT) - compose of EOD and k9 personnel ready to respond to any explosive-related incidents.

Explosive Ordnance Disposal (EOD) - the detection, identification, field evaluation, rendering-safe, recovery and final disposal of unexploded explosive ordnance (UXO). It may also include the rendering safe and/or disposal of EO which has become hazardous by damage or deterioration when the disposal of such EO requires procedures, or equipment which exceed the normal requirement for routine disposal.

Explosive-Related Incident (ERI) - any explosive-involved situation that encompasses bombings, incendiary bombings, attempted bombings, stolen and recovered explosives, threats to government facilities involving explosives, hoax devices and bomb threats.

External Stakeholders - persons/units/offices outside the PNP that may be affected by the implementation of this MC. These include students, members of the academe, other law enforcement agencies. media practitioners and the likes.

First Responders - Are members of the police, military, fire, medical teams, and other volunteer organizations who are expected to be the first to respond to calls for assistance in cases of incidents involving explosives.




Force Multipliers - are organizations outside the government which perform voluntary public safety services in support to existing government public safety functions and programs.

Freedom Park - shall mean the venue or place established or designated by local government units within their respective jurisdictions where a public assembly could be held without securing any permit for such purpose from the local government unit concerned.

Gender-Based Violence (GBV) - is used to distinguish common violence from violence that targets individuals or groups of individuals on the basis of their gender (UNICEF, 2003). It is a form of violence that is directed at a person on the basis of gender or sex. It includes acts that inflict physical, mental or sexual harm or suffering, threat of such acts, coercion and other deprivations of liberty (CEDAW).

Government - includes the national government, the local governments, the government-owned and government-controlled corporations, all other instrumentalities or agencies of the Republic of the Philippines and their branches.


Grave Child Rights Violation (GCRV) - refers to the crimes committed against children that constitute flagrant violations of their human rights and have severe consequences on their lives. These crimes include those enumerated in Section 9 of RA No. 11188.

Hasty Checkpoint - is an immediate response to block the escape of lawless elements from a crime scene, and is also established when nearby checkpoints are ignored or during hot pursuit operations. It is set up by police personnel conducting mobile patrol on board a marked police vehicle, or those conducting ISO and foot patrol operations within the vicinity/periphery of the national or provincial highways.

Health Hazard - is referred to chemical, radiological, physical or biological factors, including infectious diseases, in our environment that can have negative impacts on our short-or long-term health. Exposure can occur through radiological and nuclear exposure, touch, inhalation, and ingestion that can cause deadly and long- term effects in one's health.




Heinous and Sensational Crimes - refer to cases where the crime committed was directed against Elected Government Officials (EGO), officials appointed by the President, Judges, Prosecutors, members of the Philippine Bar, Media Practitioners, militant party list members/leftists, labor leaders, foreign nationals, and other persons, by means of shooting, bombing, strafing, enforced disappearance and other violent acts, resulting in their death or incapacitation that attract national/ international public and/or media attention or scrutiny.

High-Risk Arrest - is the actual restraint of armed persons following a high-risk stop.

High-Risk Stop - is the actual stopping or accosting of armed and dangerous person or persons, aboard a vehicle or on foot, including the power to use all necessary and legal means to accomplish such end.

Higher Authorities - any PNP official holding a position of head of office of a
higher unit (e.g., Regional Director).

High-Risk Vessel Interdiction - is a specialized seaborne law enforcement operation that involves the pursuit and boarding of a vessel with non-compliant armed suspect for violation of laws.

Hijacking - A term which immediately conjures the images of a group of heavily armed and determined men and women holding up an airplane, ship, bus, van, or other vehicle in order to achieve their nefarious objectives.

Hot Pursuit (Cross Jurisdictional Pursuit) - (also termed in the US as fresh pursuit) shall mean an immediate, recent chase or follow up without material interval for the purpose of taking into custody any person wanted by virtue of a warrant, or one suspected to have committed a recent offense while fleeing from one police jurisdictional boundary to another that will normally require prior official inter-unit coordination but which the pursuing unit cannot, at that moment, comply due to the urgency of the situation.

Immediate Family Members - shall refer to the detainee's spouse, fiance or fiance, parent or child, brother or sister, grandparent or grandchild, uncle or aunt, nephew or niece, and guardian or ward.




Imminent Danger - the danger is "imminent" if it is on the point of happening. It is not required that the attack already begins, for it may be too late. (The Revised Penal Code, Book I, JBL Reyes). The elements of imminent danger are the following:
* Intent of the suspect to harm the policeman;
* The capability of the suspect to harm the policeman or other
persons; and,
* Accessibility or the proximity of the suspect in harming the policeman and other persons.

Improvised Explosive Device - a homemade device consisting of explosives/
incendiary and firing components necessary to initiate explosion.

Incident - a happening in general; any event; an occurrence.

Incident Record Form (IRF) - is the output of CIRAS. It contains the data of the complainant, victim, suspect, case details and the narrative of the incident. The entries in the IRF shall be entered and recorded into the Police Blotter. A copy of the IRF shall also form part of the case folder and shall serve as a documentary evidence of the case.

Infectious - means the capability of transmitting a disease.

Information - refers to the data that have been processed into a document, report, memorandum, graphic or any other materials created to convey a message to the receiver.

Information and Communication Technology (ICT) - refers to the totality of electronic means to access, create, collect, store, process, receive, transmit, present and disseminate information.

Inquest Proceedings - is the informal and summary investigation conducted by a public prosecutor (called the inquest prosecutor) in criminal cases involving a person arrested, without the benefit of a warrant issued by the court, and thereafter




detained, for the purpose of determining whether or not the warrantless arrest is valid, said arrested person should remain under custody, and be correspondingly charged in court.

Intervention - Refers to a series of activities designed to address issues that cause the child to commit an offense. It may take the form of an individualized treatment program, which may include counseling, skills training, education, and other activities that will enhance his/her psychological, emotional and psycho- social well-being.

Investigation - is the collection of facts to accomplish a three-fold aim:

a. to identify the suspect;
b. to locate the suspect; and
c. to provide evidence of his guilt.

   In the performance of his duties, the investigator must seek to establish the six cardinal points of investigation, namely: (1) what specific offense has been com- mitted; (2) how the offense was committed; who committed it; where the offense was committed; and (3) when it was committed; and why it was committed.

Investigator-on-Case (IOC) - is the police officer who determines the cause or motive of the crime, identify and interview witnesses, and effects arrest of suspect/s.

Isolation - used to separate all ill persons suspected to have an eid infections from those who are healthy.

Jurisdiction - the word "jurisdiction" as used in the Constitution and statues means jurisdiction over the subject matter only, unless an exception arises by reasons of its employment in a broader sense.

Landside - the areas of an airport and buildings to which both travelling and non- travelling public have unrestricted access, as distinguished from airside areas and SRA where access is controlled.

Law Enforcement - It involves PNP - initiated projects and activities geared towards improving the peace and order situation and professionalizing the people.




Lead - refers to cause a person or group of people to move forward in unison for a good cause of the majority.

Lead Unit - a police unit that has the primary responsibility of accounting targeted
wanted persons;

Linkages - are relationships and interactions between tasks, functions, departments, and organizations that promote flow of information, ideas, and integration towards the achievement of shared objectives.

Local Police Unit (LPU) - Police unit locally assigned and having responsibility in the area (i.e., PS, MPS, CPS, PCP, CPO, PPO, PRO etc.)

Maximum Tolerance - means the highest degree of restraint that the police, military and other peace keeping authorities shall observe during a public assembly or in the dispersal of the same.

Medical Reserve Force (MRFs) - composed of PNP personnel from the different units/offices with health-related courses and profession aimed to provide medical augmentation in response to COVID-19 and other future health-related emergencies.

Metadata - information within the recording file containing any digital identifiers that are captured as part of the actual recording, such as the recording date, time, GPS coordinates, etc.

Missing Person - anyone whose whereabouts cannot be established and where the circumstances are out of character or the context suggests the person may be subject of crime or at risk of harm to themselves or another.

Motor Vehicle - any vehicle propelled by means other than muscular power using the public highways, but excepting rollers, trolley cars, street sweepers, sprinklers, lawnmowers, bulldozers, graders, forklifts, amphibian trucks and cranes if not used on public highways; also, vehicles which run only on rails or tracks, and tractors, trailers and traction engines of all kinds used exclusively for agricultural purposes. Trailers having any number of wheels, when propelled or intended to




be propelled by attachments to any motor vehicles shall be classified as separate
motor vehicles with no power rating. (Sec 2, RA 4136)

Motorist - a person driving a motor vehicle

Mug shot (or booking photograph) - it is a photograph of the suspect taken after one is arrested. The purpose of the mug shot is to allow law enforcement agency to have a photographic record of the arrested individual to allow for identification by victims and investigators. They may be compiled into a mug book or rogues gallery in order to help determine the identity of a criminal in high profile cases, mug shots may also be published by the media. The mug shot shall be taken in four (4) manners, front view half body, left side view half body, right-side view half body, front-view whole body. It shall be printed in 4R size and attached or printed on the Mug Shot Sheet of the PNP-BF. It a digital camera is used, the camera should have a resolution of not less than 5 Mega Pixel (MP), pro forma can be downloaded through didm.pnp.gov.ph)

Natural Disaster - A disaster caused by natural forces rather than by human action,
e.g., floods, storms, typhoons/tornados, drought, earthquakes, volcanic eruptions.

Neutralization - A police intervention in strict accord with the use of force continuum and/or principle of proportionality on the use of force purposely to contain or stop the unlawful aggression of the offender. This may include an arrest, capture, surrender or other acts to subdue the suspect.

Non-Government-Organization (NGO) - an intermediary organization between the people and the state and where the principal interest is to promote the welfare of the poor and disadvantaged, and where the members do not necessarily belong to such marginalized sector and live in the same area.

Organized Crime - a combination of two or more persons who are engaged in a criminal or virtual criminal activity on a continuing basis for the purpose of profit or power using gangland style to attain their purpose.

Outbreak - means an epidemic limited to localized increase in the incidence of a disease, e.g., in a village, town, or closed institution.




Pandemic - an epidemic of infectious disease that spread through human population across a large region, multiple continents or even worldwide. Pandemics are caused by diseases that are able to infect humans and can spread quite easily and become disasters when they are associated with enormous numbers of deaths and illness.

Pat-down Search - is a "frisk" or external feeling of the outer garments of an
individual for weapons only.

Person In Authority - person in authority refers to all those persons who by direct provision of law or by appointment of competent authority are charged with the maintenance of public order and the protection and security of life and property, as well as all persons who come to the aid of agents of authority; it being public functionaries are entitled to be considered as agents of authority, it being understood, nevertheless, that in order that the persons who come to the aid of an agent of authority may be considered as agents of authority, it is an essential condition that they lend such assistance, by virtue of an order or request of such agent of authority.

Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) - means the materials used to cover the human body in order to prevent contamination from the disease. This includes: facial mask, eye protector or goggles, gown, gloves, and others.

Persons Under PNP Custody (PUPC) - formerly known as "detainees, "are persons who are being hold by the PNP in its custodial facilities who were arrested for an offense or previous violation of law.

Physical Examination - The conduct of examining the engine and chassis number of a motor vehicle by a Crime Laboratory Technician and/or Police Officer through the use of the naked eyes to determine whether there is a sign of tampering/ alteration.

Physical Injury - harm done to a child's psychological or intellectual functioning which may be exhibited by severe anxiety, depression, withdrawal or outward aggressive behavior, or a combination of said behaviors which may be demonstrated by a change in behavior, emotional response or cognition.




Planned Anti-Illegal Drug Operations -

* Positive anti-illegal drug operations duly coordinated, such as buy-bust, implementation of Search Warrant, interdiction and Marijuana eradication duly coordinated with PDEA and resulted in the seizure of drugs;
* Negative anti-drug operations duly coordinated with PDEA, but no drugs
were seized from the subject;
* Implementation of Warrant of Arrest for violation of RA 9165, with or with
out seizure of drugs; and

* Uncoordinated (but not encouraged) anti-drug operations with seizure of drugs, properly monitored and recorded. For operations without seizure of drugs, only Implementation of SW for violation of RA 9165 shall be included.


PNP Custodial Officer - formerly known as "jailer," who is responsible for the
overall status of a person in custody.

PNP Personnel - any personnel working in the PNP who holds a regular position and has any corresponding restriction access. It may be Uniformed or Non- Uniformed Personnel.

Police Checkpoint - a location where the search, which is duly authorized by the PNP, is conducted to deter/prevent the commission of crimes, enforce the law, and for other legitimate purposes.

Police Blotter - an official logbook, covered blue with hardbound cover that contains the daily register of all crime incident reports, official summary of arrests and other significant events/activities reported in the police station. Relatedly, a separate pink blotter for WCPD to record all cases involving violence against women and children and those cases involving a child in conflict with the law that fall under the mandate of WCPDs.

Police Community Relations - the establishment of connection between the police and the community in order to forge partnership and strengthen collaboration and linkages for a common good.




Population - refers to the density of inhabitants in a given area. The figure to be used is the medium assumption as per the records from the Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA).

Post-Blast Crime Scene - refers to an area where an eri occurred particularly in an explosion incident whether due to detonation or controlled explosion as a result of render safe procedure.

Prescribed Uniform - refers to the all types of clothing, apparel, or gear including other accessories and accoutrements whose specifications were reviewed, deliberated and evaluated by the Uniforms and Equipment Specifications Board (UESB) and approved by the C, PNP based on the NAPOLCOM approved standards and National Historical Commission of the Philippines (NHCP) for logos and pins, to be worn by the PNP personnel while participating in law enforcement police operational and administrative activities.

Preservation - refers to the keeping of data that already exists in a stored form, protected from anything that would cause its current quality or condition to change or deteriorate. (Source: Rule on Cybercrime Warrant)

Probable Cause (as used in Flagging Down Motorists  Who are Under the
Influence of Alcohol, and/or Dangerous Drugs and Similar Substances Rule
2.3c)- shall mean that the LEO has reasonable ground to believe that the person driving the motor vehicle is under the influence of alcohol, dangerous drugs and/ or other similar substances upon personally witnessing a traffic offense committed by means of lane straddling, making sudden stops, over speeding, swerving or weaving in such an apparent way as to indicate that the driver is under the influence of alcohol, dangerous drugs and/or other similar substances.

Property Custodian - the Property Custodian is a designated individual who has the authority and responsibility for the immediate physical custody of all personal property under their control and within their custodial area. He is the person designated to receive, store, issue properties, attach identification tags or labels to property to type of object and keep records of incoming and outgoing properties.

Public Assembly - means any rally, demonstration, march, parade, procession or any other form of mass or concerted action held in a public place for the purpose of presenting a lawful cause; or expressing an opinion to the general public on any




particular issue; or protesting or influencing any state of affairs whether political, economic or social; or petitioning the government for redress of grievances.

Public Place - shall include any highway, boulevard, avenue, road, street, bridge or other thoroughfare, park, plaza, square, and/ or any open space of public ownership where the people are allowed access.

Public Information - refers to the information that may be of interest to the general public about policy, procedures, events such and other newsworthy, ongoing investigations.

Public Officer - elective and appointive officials and employees, permanent or temporary, whether in the classified or unclassified or exemption service receiving compensation, event nominal, from the government.

Quarantine - means the separation of people who have been exposed to an illness, usually an infection, but are not ill or have not yet shown any sign of the illness. The movements and interaction of these people are restricted during the quarantine period which is equivalent to the incubation period of the disease. Those who get ill during the quarantine period are immediately isolated.

Reasonable Suspicion - facts that, within totality of the circumstances, lead an officer to reasonably suspect, or to have probable cause to believe, that criminal activity has been, is being, or is about to be committed.

Recording - digital material generated as a result of using body- worn cameras or alternative recording devices, which contains images and audio-video footages. It shall include the copies of the material created by way of copying to portable media storage and other data repositories.

Redaction - an act or instance of selecting or adapting (as by obscuring or removing sensitive information) for publication or release.

Red Areas of Operation - is a predominantly rural area where a landlord-peasant contradiction exists. This is an area, normally a typical farming barangay or a fishing community, within a guerilla front. It is the base of political organs and armed units




necessary to advance the revolution under the strategy of encircling the cities from the countryside. The Red Area provides the following:
* Armed presence necessary to maintain a psychological environment
required to advance AOM activities; and
* A secured place of refuge for activists from the White Areas.

Restriction - limiting the activities of an individual infected with a contagious disease to prevent the spread of the disease to others. Examples: preventing a typhoid carrier from working in a restaurant; quarantining a person with infectious tuberculosis.

Return of Warrant - a return of a warrant for the arrest of a person, by the officer to whom it was given for service, showing substantially all that the officer did within the scope of proper execution.

Scene of the Crime Operations (SOCO) - includes the processing of crime scene, technical and forensic examination of evidence and similar scientific investigative assistance.

Search Warrant - is an order in writing issued in the name of the People of the Philippines, signed by a judge and directed to a peace officer, commanding him to search for personal property described therein and bring it before the court.

Security Officer - a properly trained and cleared officer whose appointment is covered by appropriate orders with the concurrence of the Directorate for Intelligence and possesses the following qualifications: (1) Cleared in accordance with provision of PNPRG 200-012 dated 29 June 1991, for access to the highest classified material his office is authorized to handle; (2) Possess a certificate of training in a regular Security Course or its equivalent In-Service Training Security Course with POI patterned after an approved Security Training Course; (3) Be conversant with the provisions of PNPRG 200-012 and all other publications pertinent to the duties and responsibilities of a security officer.

Security Survey - an evaluation of security needs including the identification of vulnerabilities which could be exploited to carry out an act of unlawful interference, and the recommendation of corrective actions.




Social Distancing - the process of reducing contacts between individuals to reduce the chance of the disease spreading. Community social distancing can include barring public gatherings, closing public places such as malls and movie theaters, canceling sporting and entertainment events, and closing nonessential workplaces.

Social Media - are channels and forms of communication with the use of internet where netizens create online accounts to create and share content, and participate in sharing information, ideas, personal messages, and other contents, such as videos and pictures.

Social Media Officer - refers to a PCO/Police Non-Commissioned Officer (PNCO) who assesses and scrutinizes details of contents to be posted in official PNP social media pages and accounts.

Social Networking Team - refers to a group of PNP personnel authorized to manage/administer the official PNP social media accounts such as Facebook, twitter, YouTube, and Instagram and responsible in addressing issues and concerns posted by the public in the SNS.

Spot Check/Accosting - is the brief stopping of an individual, whether on foot or in a vehicle, based on reasonable suspicion/ probable cause, for the purpose of determining the individual's identity and resolving the officer's suspicion concerning criminal activity.

Territorial Police Unit - other national support units assigned in a regional or provincial area (i.e., RCIDU, RACU, PIAS etc.)

Terrorism - Any person who commits an act punishable under the Revised Penal Code hereby sowing and creating a condition of widespread and extraordinary fear and panic among the populace, in order to coerce the government to give in to an unlawful demand shall be guilty of the crime of terrorism.

Terrorist Organization, Association or Group of Persons - shall refer to any entity organized for the purpose of engaging in terrorism, or those proscribed under section 26 of the Anti-Terrorosm Act of 2020, or to United Nation Security Council-designated terrorist organizations.




The State - shall refer to the Philippine government and its relevant government agencies, organizations and entities.

Trafficking In Persons - The recruitment, transport, transfer or harboring, or receipt of persons with or without consent or knowledge, within or across national borders, by means of threat or use of force, or other forms of coercion, abduction, fraud, deception, abuse of power or of position, taking advantage of the vulnerability of the person, or, the giving or receiving of payments or benefits to achieve the consent of the person having control over another person for the purpose of exploitation or the prostitution of others or others forms of sexual exploitation, forced labor, or services, slavery, servitude or the removal or sale of organs.

TRIMP - refers to an acronym for Television, Radio, Internet, Messaging and Print which are channels/ways of public information.

Unlawful Aggression - refers to an attack amounting to actual or eminent threat to the life, limb, or right of the person claiming self-defense.

Unredacted - (of images) visible, not removed or hidden.

Vessel Board Search and Seizure - is a seaborne law enforcement operation that involve the boarding of a marine vessel violating laws within Philippine territorial waters and rivers including port and harbors. The same shall include the subsequent search of the vessel and seizure of evidence found therein that is incidental to the arrest.

Victim - the aggrieved party.

Violence Against Women - refers to any act of gender-based violence that results in, or is likely to result in, physical, sexual, or psychological harm or suffering to women, including threats of such acts, coercion, or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in public or in private life. It shall be understood to encompass, but not limited to (1) physical, sexual, psychological, and economic violence occurring in the family, including battering, sexual abuse of female children in the household, dowry-related violence, marital rape, and other traditional practices harmful to women, non-spousal violence, and violence related to exploitation;
(2) physical, sexual, and psychological violence occurring within the general




community, including rape, sexual abuse, sexual harassment, and intimidation at work, in educational institutions and elsewhere, trafficking in women, and prostitution; and (3) physical, sexual, and psychological violence perpetrated or condoned by the State, wherever it occurs. It also includes acts of violence against women as defused in RAs No. 9208, 9262 and 9710 (Magna Carta of Women).

Violence Against Women and Their Children (also called intimate Partner Violence) - refers to any act or a series of acts committed by any person against a woman who is his wife, former wife, or against a woman with whom the person has or had a sexual or dating relationship, or with whom he has a common child, or against her child whether legitimate or illegitimate, within or without the family abode, which result in or is likely to result in physical, sexual, psychological harm or suffering, or economic abuse including threats of such acts, battery, assault, coercion, harassment or arbitrary deprivation of liberty. It includes, but is not limited to, physical, sexual, and psychological violence, and economic abuse (RA 9262).

Waiver - the doctrine of waiver, from its nature, applies ordinarily to all rights of privileges to which a person is legally entitled, provided such rights or privileges belong to the individual and are intended solely for his benefit.

Warrant of Arrest (WA) - a written document issued by a court ordering any law enforcer to bring the person before the court so that he may be bound to answer for the commission of the offense.

White Areas of Operation - is a technical term (initially used by CTG and adapted by the AFP- PNP) which refers to areas where CTG influence is exerted through legal struggle as their primary strategy and armed struggle such as partisan operation (SPARU/Liquidation), the secondary. These are usually urbanized areas where government and political structures are established; center of commerce and of and influence over resources, primarily population (masses) are contested by the government and the CTG. (Revised JLD No. 3, s. 2020)

Whole-of-Nation Approach - addresses the root causes of insurgencies, internal disturbances and tension, and other armed conflicts and threats by prioritizing and harmonizing the delivery of basic services and social development packages of the government, facilitating societal inclusivity, and ensuring active participation of all sectors in the pursuit of the country's peace agenda. (Executive Order No. 70)




Women and Children Protection Desk (WCPD) - an office that is provided in all police station which addresses all incidents involving Violence Against Women and their Children, Trafficking in Person, and other Gender-Based-Violence such as those provided for in PNP policies and Philippine laws. It also involved in the processing of Child in Conflict With the Law as provided for in RA 9344 (Juvenile Justice and Welfare Act) and Child in Armed Conflict as provided for in RA 11188 (Special Protection of Children in Situation of Armed Conflict) to ensure the safety and protection of the child's rights.




LIST OF ANNEXES

"A"	-	Prescribed Uniform
"B"	-	Coordination Form
"C"	-	Use of Force Continuum
"D"	-	Exparte Motion for Leave
"E"	-	Return of Warrant Form
"F"	-	PNP Booking Form-1 "Medical Examination of the
Suspects, Request Form"
"G"	-	PNP Booking Form 2- "Arrest and Booking Form"
"H"	-	Affidavits of PNP personnel whose BWCs/ARDs were used
"I"	-	PNP Booking Form - 2A "Medical Examination Result
Sheet"
"J"	-	PNP Booking Form 2-B "Booking Mug Shots" Form
"K"	-	PNP Booking Form-3 "Turn-over of Arrested Suspect/s"
Form
"L"	-	"Jailer's Receipt of Suspects" Form
"M"	-	PNP Booking Form - 4 "Suspects Property Receipt"
"N"	-	PNP Booking Form - 2C "Tenprint Card" PNPCL Form No
452-038
"O"	-	Application for Search Warrant
"O-1" -	-	Joint Affidavit
"O-2"	-	Deposition of Witness
"P"	-	Receipt for Property Seized
"P-1"	-	Certification of Orderly Search
"Q"	-	Compliance/Return of Search Warrant
"Q-1"	-	Verification
"R"	-	Pre-Operation Report (for Anti-Illegal Drugs Operations) "S"	-	Coordination Form (for Anti-Illegal Drugs Operations) "T"	-	Chain of Custody Form for Drug Evidence
"U"	-	Chain of Custody Form for Non-Drug Evidence
"V"	-	Chain of Custody Form for Laboratory "W"	-	Certificate of Inventory of Seized Items "X"	-	Anti Kidnapping Operation Flowchart "Y"	-	Preservation Letter
"Z"	-	11 General Orders of a Duty Guard.
"AA"	-	The 5 Ps of Crisis Management
"BB"	-	Incident Command System (ICS) Organizational Structure
"CC"	-	Crisis Management Committee Organizational Structure




"DD"	-	PNP NHQ Critical Incident Management Committee (CIMC)
Organizational Structure
"EE"	-	PNP NHQ Critical Incident Management Task Groups (CIMTG) Organizational Structure
"EE-1"	-	PNP PRO Critical Incident Management Task Groups (CIMTG) Organizational Structure
"FF"	-	PNP NHQ Disaster Incident Management Task Groups (DIMTG) Organizational Structure
"FF-1"	-	PNP PRO Disaster Incident Management Task Groups (DIMTG) Organizational Structure
"GG"	-	Joint Security Task Force (STF) Organizational Structure
"HH"	-	Dying Declaration
"II"	-	CSI Form 1: First Responders Form
"JJ"	-	CSI Form 4: SOCO Report Form 1: Persons Who Entered the Crime Scene
"JJ-1"	-	Significant Persons Present at the Vicinity of the Crime Scene
"JJ-2"	-	CSI Form 4: SOCO Report Form 2: Evidence Log
"JJ-3"	-	CSI Form 4: SOCO Report Form 3: Crime Scene Sketch
"JJ-4"	-	CSI Form 4: SOCO Report Form 4: Inventory of Evidence Collected
"KK"	-	Request for the Conduct of SOCO "LL"	-	IOC/Investigator's CSI Form "MM"	-	Release of Crime Scene Form "NN"	-	Incident Record Form (IRF)
"OO"	-	Judicial Affidavit
"PP"	-	Sworn Statement
"QQ"	-	Case Referral Signed by Chief of Office
"RR"	-	Affidavit of Arrest;
"SS"	-	Affidavit(s) of Complaint(s);
"TT"	-	Affidavit(s) of the Witness(es)
"UU"	-	Request for Preliminary Investigation and Waiver of Article 125, Revised Penal Code
"VV"	-	Crisis Communication Action Team (CCAT)





ANNEXES



ANNEX "A"



























































ANNEX "B"







ANNEX "C"





ANNEX "D"
Republic of the Philippines First Judicial Region Regional Trial Court Branch 53
Rosales, Pangasinan


THE PHILIPPINE NATIONAL POLICE
Thru Regional Intelligence Unit 1, IG
And Rosales, Police Station, Rosales, Panagsinan Represented by 	
Plaintiffs,
- versus -	Case No. 	  For: 	

Defendant,
x	x
EXPARTE MOTION FOR LEAVE
      PLAINTIFFS by themselves and unto this Honorable Court respectfully aver that:
1. On 	 this Honorable Court issued a warrant of
arrest directing the police officers to arrest 	 for the crime of 	 and further in the Order requiring the use of at least one-body-worn camera and one alternative recording device, or a minimum of two devices as necessary to capture and record the relevant incidents during the execution of the warrant;
      2. For reason of unavailability of body worn cameras to this date, our Offices, through the undersigned, respectfully move to this Honorable Court to allow our police operatives who will implement the warrant to use at least two (2) alternative recording devices.




PRAYER


      WHEREFORE, premises considered the undersigned respectfully prayed to this Honorable Court to issue an Order allowing the Regional Intelligence Unit 1, and Rosales Police Station to use at least two (2) alternative recording device necessary to capture and record the relevant incidents during the execution of the abovesaid warrant issued by this Honorable Court.

Other relief just and equitable is likewise prayed for.


This		
	.

day	of		

2021	in





Movant/Requester
Chief, Regional Intelligence Unit 1




     Movant/Requester Chief, Rosales Police Station
Rosales, Pangasinan


NOTICE

TO THE CLERK OF COURT
Branch 53, Rosales Pangasinan Dear Sir/Maam:
      Kindly submit our Ex-parte Motion to this Honorable Court for his consideration.






ANNEX "E"








ANNEX "F"









ANNEX "G"



















ANNEX "H"
(Sample Affidavits of the officers whose body-worn cameras or alternative recording
devices were used to capture the recordings and the Data Custodian)	


Republic of the Philippines) Quezon City	) s.s.


JOINT AFFIDAVIT



We, 	 and 	, both of legal age,
married/single,  active  member  of  the  Philippine  National  Police  currently
assigned at 	 with the designation as 	
and			respectively	and	with	office	address	situated	at
	 under oath depose and state that:

1. The date, time, and place of the recording

I 	 one of the searching officer/arresting
officer with body worn camera or alternative recording devices used to capture
the recordings during the implementation of SW / WA / busy-bust operation

conducted on 	
	; and

at 	

of 	

o'clock against


I 	 the investigator and data custodian of
the data/recording data/recordings used to capture the recordings during the implementation of SW / WA / busy-bust operation conducted on 	

at 	

of 	

o'clock against 	

from the

camera that Pat	 used and it was I that stored the recording in an external media storage device (USB).

      2. The manner by which the recording was -taken and stored, and when applicable, the fact of unavailability of body-worn cameras and that a resort to alternative recording devices was necessary, and the circumstances detailing the non-activation, interruption, or sudden termination of the recording




During the implementation of the said SW/WA/Buy-bust Operation, I
	 used a body-worn camera/alternative recording device that captured and recorded the relevant incidents during the execution of the said warrant. I worn the said camera in the conspicuous location and in the manner that maximizes my ability to capture the recording of the search and arrest. I activated the camera from arrival at the place of the search/arrest and continue to record the manner of the search / arrest conducted showing the police operative searching the place together with our two witnesses namely 	 and 	/ arresting the subject of the warrant.

a. The delivery of the arrested person / searched items to the 	
police station; and

b. The manner the inventory conducted in the presence of the accused and our witnesses / the conduct of booking procedure of the person of the arrested person.

      3. The fact that person was notified of the use of body-worn cameras or alternative recording devices

      I,	, before the conduct of search/arrest, notified the lawful occupants of the premises to be searched / person to be arrested and other subjects of the recording that the execution of the warrant is being recorded and that we are conducting a search/making an arrest pursuant to the warrant issued by a court.

      4. The date, time, place, and other circumstances surrounding the first instance of retrieval or download of the recordings from the cameras;


On 	

at about 	

at 	

police

station, I 	 turned-over the body worn camera/alternative recording device to 		, the data custodian.

      Upon receipt of the body worn camera / alternative recording device from 	, I 	 retrieved/downloaded the data/ recordings from the camera that was used and I stored the recording in an external media storage device (USB). During the downloading process, I, the data custodian, in the presence of the accused' counsel and two witnesses, downloaded the recordings from the camera to the external drive prior to his safekeeping.

      5. The name and positions of the persons who had possession of and access to the recordings, including details of such access, from the time of their taking until their deposit with court;




      I, 	the data custodian and assigned investigator had the sole possession and access to the recordings from the time the data/recording was retrieved/downloaded from the cameras. The data downloaded from the cameras was encypted and the metadata contained in the recording was preserved by me.

      6. The fact of redaction of personal identifiers appearing in the recording whenever applicable, the special circumstances justifying such redaction, and the details redacted, pursuant to Section 4, Rule 4 of these Rules;

      I,	, during the recording in the presence of the accused' lawyer and two witnesses, redacted sensitive information and images appeared in the recordings for the accused and other people protection

      7. Whenever applicable, a certification that both unredacted and redacted files containing the recordings are submitted to the court;

      I, 	, undertake that a certification that both unredacted and redacted files containing the recordings will be submitted to the court;

8. The names and positions of the officers who will be delivering the
recordings to the court

I, 	 the data custodian of the said recording undertakes to
deliver the recording to the court;

      9. (OPTIONAL) Reasonable ground in case of noncompliance with any of the requirements on the use of body-worn cameras or alternative recording devices, including all acts undertaken showing genuine and sufficient efforts exerted to ensure compliance with these Rules

I,	the possessor of the body-worn camera failed to

record the implementation of the SW/WA because the camera malfunctioned/ defective or I have no issue BWC. Thus, I resorted to use alternative recording
device using my own phone (	).


In witness whereof, we have hereunto affixed our signature this 	 day of
	, 2021 in 	.








	
Searcher/Arresting Officer	Data Custodian/Investigator

Subscribed and sworn to before me this    day of 	 2021 in
	.




ANNEX "I"







ANNEX "J"












ANNEX "K"






ANNEX "L"






ANNEX "M"







ANNEX "N"







ANNEX "O"





ANNEX "O-1"






ANNEX "O-2"






ANNEX "P"








ANNEX "P-1"





ANNEX "Q"




ANNEX "Q-1"









ANNEX "R"




ANNEX "S"













ANNEX "T"




ANNEX "U"







ANNEX "V"





ANNEX "W"










ANNEX "Y"


SAMPLE LETTER RE: PRESERVATION OF CCTV LETTERHEAD
Date

BRANCH MANAGER
	 Gas Station
Address

RE: PRESERVATION OF CCTV DATA

Dear Sir/Ma'am:

This pertains to the investigation being conducted by the 	
in  relation  to  the  shooting  incident  that  transpired  within  your  premises  on
	 involving 	.

      In view thereof, pursuant to Section 13 of RA No. 10175 (Cybercrime Prevention Act of 2021), you are directed to preserve the content data of the CCTV particularly the footage covering the period 	(time) of (date) to  (time) of 	 (date). The aforementioned data will be used in the ongoing investigation.

      Your utmost cooperation on this matter is highly appreciated. For any concerns, kindly contact 		 (provide name of contact person) with mobile number 	. or email address 	.


Very truly yours,




RANK/NAME
Team Leader




ANNEX "Z"


Eleven General Orders of a Duty Guard


1. To take charge of this post and all government property in view.

2. To walk my post in a military manner, keeping always on the alert and observing everything that takes place within sight or hearing.

3. To report all violations of orders I am instructed to enforce.

4. To repeat all calls from post more distant from the guardhouse than my own.

5. To quit my post only when properly relieved.

6. To receive, obey, and pass on to the sentinel who relieves me all orders from the Commanding Officer, Officer of the Day, and officers and noncommissioned officers of the guard only.

7. To talk to no one except in the line of duty.

8. To give the alarm in case of fire or disorder.

9. To call the commander of the relief on any case not covered by instructions.

10. To salute all officers, and all colors and standards not cased.

11. To be especially watchful at night and during the time for challenging to challenge all persons on or near my post and to allow no one to pass without proper authority.






The 5 Ps

ANNEX "AA"




The 5 Ps are executed in three phases - proactive (predict, prevent,
prepare); reactive (perform); and post conflict (post action and assessment).

1. Proactive Phase - is designed to predict or prevent the probability of occurrence of crises at the same time prepare to handle them when such occur.

a. 	Predict - attempts to remove uncertainty from the future. The Predict component is undertaken through Strategic, Operational and Tactical Situation Awareness (SA) processes. Strategic SA is producing foresight and conveying strategic warnings through Horizon Scanning or Strategic Forecasting. It scans the environment, identifying weak signals, drivers, inhibitors, wildcards, threats, hazards, risks, opportunities and vulnerabilities, among others, develops foresight and conveys strategic warnings. Operational and Tactical SA is producing detailed reports against a specified threat, describing the operating environment where a threat or a crisis could emerge; the threat or the crisis itself, its potential of becoming a crisis; and current efforts and capabilities of agencies/departments addressing the threat or crisis.

b. Prevent - a deliberate action aimed at avoiding future harm by addressing its causes. It is closely Related to mitigation which accepts that a potentially harmful incident cannot be prevented, but harmful consequences arising from it can be minimized by precautionary measures. The two (2) preventive measures are: the first involves a long-term strategy that is expected to yield effects over years; and, the other is operational in nature (e.g. target hardening). Prevention capability is essentially physical security. Itis the responsibility of government security forces with the support of Barangay Peacekeeping Action Teams (BPATs). For man-made incidents, it requires vigilance and alertness to signs and manifestations of suspicious looking individuals; warning and alert systems have to be established to alert the population to minimize the effects of




terrorism attacks in terms of casualties and damages, active and passive security measures.

c. Prepare - essential for effective response. It covers six (6) essential activities: Plan, Organize, Train, Equip, Exercise and Evaluate and Improve. Simulation and tabletop exercises evaluate the effectiveness of preparations, bring out flaws and weaknesses and enable corrections and remedies to be effected, to heighten levels of readiness of systems, procedures, organization, equipment and logistics, to better cope with actual crisis.

2. Reactive Phase - is the institution of passive and active security measures, remedy or solution to destabilizing factors or security flaws to such crisis, or emergency, vigilance and alertness to signs or manifestations of developing crisis, or emergency and establishment of alert systems.

a. Perform - the actual implementation of contingency Plans when a crisis occurs, despite the pro-active measures undertaken. Once a crisis occurs, priorities shift from building or enhancing capabilities to employing resources to save lives, protect property and environment, and preserve the social, economic and political structure of the jurisdiction. POST CONFLICT PHASE - is the situation when the proactive and reactive phases were all done.

b. Post-Action and Assessment - a component which begins when the crisis has been addressed and the situation is deemed clear. It is in this phase where the organization is returning to business as usual. Post - Action activities seek ways to evaluate and improve prevention, preparation and the actual execution.




ANNEX "BB"









ANNEX "CC"












ANNEX "DD"





ANNEX "EE"





ANNEX "EE-1"






ANNEX "FF"





ANNEX "FF-1"





ANNEX "GG"





ANNEX "HH"








ANNEX "II"







ANNEX "JJ"





ANNEX "JJ-1"





ANNEX "JJ-2"
















ANNEX "JJ-3"






ANNEX "JJ-4"






ANNEX "KK"





ANNEX "LL"
























ANNEX "MM"





ANNEX "NN"












ANNEX "OO"

JUDICIAL AFFIDAVIT


I,		,			years	old,	born
on		, (single/married) employed as 	 at 	, after having been duly sworn to in accordance with law, hereby depose and state:

PRELIMINARY STATEMENT

      That in accordance with A.M. No, 12-8-8-SC, which prescribes the use of judicial affidavits to serve as the direct examination testimony of the witness, on the basis of which the adverse party may conduct their cross-examination on such a witness, I hereby execute this judicial affidavit in a question and answer format ;

      That conformably with section 3 (b) of the said A.M. no. 12-8-8- SC, I also state that it was 	, investigator

of 	
undersigned affiant;

who conducted the examination of the


      That conformably also with section 3 (c) thereof, I hereby state under the pain of perjury that in answering the questions asked of me, as appearing herein below, I am fully conscious that I did so under oath, and that I may face criminal liabilities for false testimony or perjury;

AND UNDERT OATH, AVERS THE FOLLOWING:

[knowledge/information about illegal drug network]

1. Q	:	What are the reasons why you are voluntarily came to this Office?
A	:	Because I want to change my life and I want to freely and voluntarily give information relative to the illegal activities of my previous drug syndicate.

2. Q	:	If that is the case, can you tell us all your knowledge/information about the illegal drugs activities of your gang?
A	:	Yes sir, I am previously a member of the 	.We are




	 members in the gang. Our leader is 	 an
AWOL PNP Officer. The other gang members are 	,
	, 	, 	
	,		at		.
Every one of us carry caliber .45 pistols for our protection.	We
have also two long firearms (armalite rifles) inside our service
	 with plate number 	. Our gang
controlled the marketing of illegal drugs known as "SHABU" all over
	. We usually peddled 5-10 kilograms of
"SHABU" in a week

3. Q	:	What is your function in the gang?
A	:	I'm the one looking for pushers in the street level.

4. Q	: If you look for pushers, what did you do?
A	:	I will set a meeting and talk with them on the drug deal.

5. Q	:	What happened if they agreed with the drug deal with your gang? A	 : They will become our pusher member and they have the privilege to use "SHABU" in our den for free, provided they will sell our item
"SHABU"and remit the proceeds to the gang everyday.

6. Q	 :	 How many grams do you give to your pushers every day? A	:	I give each of them 50 grams.

7. Q	:	How much per gram of your "SHABU"?
A	:	We give only 200.00 per gram to our pushers.

8. Q	:	You said that your gang has a drug den, where it is located and
who manage it?
A	:	It Is located at 	
  Our leader 	 manage our drug den.

9. Q	: Who are your street pushers/peddlers?
A	: As far as I remember, they are 	,
	, 	,	
	 and 	.

10. Q	:	Where did they live?
A	:		 live in 	, 	
	 at

while	at	. I did not know where the two pushers live.




11. Q	:	You have elaborated your pushing activities, may I know where do you get your supply of "SHABU"?
A	:	Most of our "SHABU" came from 	.

12. Q	:	Can you specify on whom do you get your "SHABU"?
A	:	Being in the underground world, I have heard many big names but there is always a common name I know as the main supplier, his name is 	, a
Filipino-Chinese national.

13. Q	:	Now, that you mentioned 	 as the main supplier, how big his illegal drug activities and how powerful or influential he is?
A	:		His illegal drugs trade is a multi-billion underworld business. He has connections in China and here in the Philippines, both political and law enforcement.

14. Q	:	Do you know who are his connections here in the Philippines?
A	:	As far as I know, he is very close to 	
	 , a three star general in Camp Crame. Also, with
	, a Congressman in Cebu.

15. Q	:	How do you know him?
A	:	Sometimes in 2015 I and 	 were introduced during a special gathering of a local politician friend.

16. Q	:	On your first meeting, what were your agenda?
A	:	He talks about illegal drugs business in the Philippines. He looked for some trusted persons to deal with the illegal drugs. He asked me if I can be his partner here in the Philippines, but I refused his offer. However, I assured him that I can be one of his primary pushers.

17. Q  :  Now that you're on the deal of pushing his "SHABU", how it is done
to have you the illegal drugs?
A : I pick up the "SHABU" in the port. He calls me that his "SHABU" arrives and available for pick up in the port , there we met in the port and gives me the volume I needed

18. Q	:	You said that the "SHABU" arrives in the port, where does it came
from?
A	:	The "SHABU" came from main land China.




19. Q	:	How and where it is transported?
A	:	Mr. ( name of the main supplier) has a legitimate cargo
business from China to Manila and vice versa. He owned 3 vessels. Every time each vessel arrived in the Manila port it carries large volumes of "SHABU" , alongside with his legal cargo business.

20. Q	:	What are the vessels names?
A	: It is MV 	, MV 	 and MV
	.

21. Q	:	When and where these vessels ducked here in the Philippines?
A	: Usually the vessels arrived on Sunday, Wednesday and Friday at pier 25, Port of Manila.

22. Q	:  Do you know any elected local government official protecting the
illegal drugs in your place?
A	: I do believed our own Mayor	
involved and also protecting the illegal drugs "SHABU"in our place.

23. Q	:	Why did you say that your Mayor is protecting the "SHABU"
activities?
A	:	Because all the "SHABU" pushers who had been arrested by the police in our place were never been prosecuted for illegal drugs activities.because of our Mayor's intervention in the initiation
of complaints.

24. Q	:	What were the police do?
A	:		In fear of our Mayor, the police just temporarily locked up the arrested pushers in the station and freed them after, without filing any criminal complaints for illegal drugs. Since then, the police tolerated the pushing of "SHABU"in our place.

25. Q	:	What else can you say that your Mayor is involved in protecting the
"SHABU" activities in your place?
A	:			 has unexplained wealth. Since he was elected as our Mayor, he has built 4 mansions with swimming pool, 5 luxury cars, 2 yachts and 3 10-story commercial buildings.

26. Q	: You said that he police tolerated the pushing of "SHABU"in your place because your Mayor at any time intervene the law enforcement activities against illegal drugs, as of today, how rampant is "SHABU"in your place?
A	:	I do believe almost all the barangays in our (Municipality/City) has been infiltrated by the illegal drugs "SHABU"activities. I believe that every barangay has pusher.




27. Q	:		xxxxx OTHER CONNECTING QUESTIONS XXXXX	
A	:		xxxxxANSWERS XXXX 	

28. Q	:	Are you willing to help us find and bring the other members of your
gang to justice?
A	:	Yes. I am willing to help in order to stop their illegal drug activities

29. Q	:	For the meantime, I don't have further questions, do you have any
statements to add or take away on this affidavit?
A	:	I don't have sir for the meantime.

30. Q	:	Were you threatened, promised or bribed to do this confession? A	 :		No sir. I made it voluntarily with my own free will.

31. Q	:	Are you willing to sign this affidavit consisting of six (6) pages, to
certify that all the statements you made are true.
A	:	Yes sir.

****** END OF STATEMENT*******

      IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I hereunto set my hand below this 	 day of 	2016 at 	.




Affiant

SUBSCRIBED AND SWORN to before me this 	 , day of
	, 2016 at 	
	 . Further, I certify that I personally examined the herein affiant that he
voluntarily executed and fully understood his statements.




Administering Officer




ATTESTATION

I, 	 , investigator of 	(Police Station)	,
	( Location)	, on my	oath	as the	Investigator-on- Case ( IOC) hereby depose and states :

That I have personally conducted the foregoing examination to the witness-

affiant 	, at
	( Location)	.

	(Police Station)	,


      That I have faithfully recorded and translated into English language the questions asked of him/her and the corresponding answers that he/she gave in response to the questions asked;

Neither I nor any other person/s coached this witness-affiant regarding the
answers given by her.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I hereunto set my hand below, this 	 day of 	, 2016 at 	.



Investigator






SUBSCRIBED  AND  SWORN	to before me this 	 day of
	2016 at 	. Further, I certify that I personally examined the herein affiant that he voluntarily executed and fully understood his statements.



Administering Officer




ANNEX "PP"













ANNEX "QQ"
Sample Format of Case Referral (Regular Filing and Inquest)


          Republic of the Philippines Department of the Interior and Local Government
Philippine National Police




(DATE)

The Homicide City Chief Prosecutor Office of the 	 Prosecutor Justice Hall 		


(Attn: Duty Inquest Prosecutor) Greetings
I have the honor to refer to your Office, the records of investigation relative

to the case of (crime), committed at about 	
	 .

of 	 at


COMPLAINANT	: (Name, age, nationality, civil status and current address)

VICTIM	: (Name, age, nationality, civil status and current address)

SUSPECT ( ARRESTED/DETAINED)
(Name, age, nationality, civil status and current address)

EVIDENCE RECOVERED :

FACTS OF THE CASE :

Investigation disclosed ......




ENCLOSURES   :
a) Subscribed Investigative Data Form)
b) SS of the complainant
c) SS of the witness
d) SS of the witness
e) Joint Affidavit of Arrest
f) Medico-Legal Report
g) As a stated evidence recovered
h) Death Certificate of the Victim
i) Anatomical sketch of the victim
j) Booking and information of the suspect
k) And others to be presented later

This case will be presented to you by (Name of Investigator-On-Case) of this Office during the counts of inquest proceedings. Further, request furnished this Office copy of resolution of the case and other proceedings.

For appropriate action and disposition.



Chief of Police




Another Sample Format of Case Referral

          Republic of the Philippines Department of the Interior and Local Government
Philippine National Police




(DATE)

Hon. Chief, State Prosecutor Department of Justice, Padre Faura, Manila

Sir/Madam:

Respectfully referred to your good office for inquest proceedings are the
herein record of investigation relative to a case for Robbery committed as follows:

VICTIMS/COMPLAINANT :		

RESPONDENTS :		

WITNESSES :	

Date/Time and Place of Occurrence:


On		

at	about		

along




EVIDENCE :
1. Sworn Statement of the Complainant/s
2. Sworn Statement of the Witnesses
3. Joint Affidavit of Arresting Police Officers
4. Other to be presented later.




FACTS OF THE CASE:

(Complete brief narrative of the facts)

This case will be presented by (Name of Investigator-On-Case)


Very truly yours,




Chief of Police




ANNEX "RR"
Sample of Affidavit of Arresting Officers


Republic of the Philippines )
	, 	


) s.s.

X	x


JOINT AFFIDAVIT OF ARREST

We,	the	UNDERSIGNED	Police	Officers,	both	members	of	the
Philippine National Police, presently assigned at the 	,
	, 	, do hereby depose and state THAT :

01. We are among the members of the
	 who conducted entrapment operations at 		 located along
	, 	 :

02. Said operation stemmed from the complaints of 	for
violation of 	 which was referred to our office
by the 	 against		, (age),	(civil status),
(nationality) and residing at No. 	
_, 	 :


       03. On the complaint dated crime committed ).

, (state the act and the


04. Upon receipt of their said complaint, our office planned out an
entrapment operation against the suspect.	At about	of

	, the undersigned together with the complainant proceeded at the
pre-arranged	pay	off			located	along
	 , 	 to give the money being asked by
the respondent;

      05. Upon arrival thereat, complainants waited for the suspect to arrive while we the undersigned seated near the table of the complainants. At about
	, suspect arrived and approached the complainants and after few conversation, complainants handed over the marked money to the suspect that minutes of prompted the undersigned to immediately effect arrest;




      06. Seized and recovered in the possession and control of the arrested person were the following, to wit :

a) Marked money, (state the denomination and serial numbers) ;
b) (Name of documents promised) ;
c) (type of CP and SIM Card) ; and
d) Other evidence confiscated;

      07. Suspect together with the seized and recovered evidence was brought to the 	, 	,
	 for booking and proper disposition. Likewise, the arrested person was apprised of their rights as provided for under the Constitution of the Philippines.

08. The	report	of	the	PNP	Crime	Laboratory	Group	Physical
Identification	Report	No.			dated
	, revealed that suspect 	 was POSITIVE for the presence of Bright Yellow Ultraviolet Fluorescent powder on both palm and right dorsal portion of the hands.

      We executed this joint affidavit to attest the truthfulness of the foregoing facts and to support the filing of Criminal Cases against 	 for violation of 	.

AFFIANTS SAYETH NAUGHT.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, we hereunto affixed our signature this 	
day of 	 at 	, 	.


Affiant	Affiant


SUBSCRIBED AND SWORN to before me this 	 day of
	 at 	, I HEREBY CERTIFY that I have person- ally examined the herein affiants and I am satisfied that they .voluntarily executed and understood their given affidavit.


Administering Officer




ANNEX "SS"
Sample of Affidavit of Complaint


Republic of the Philippines )
	, 	 x--------------------------------------x


) s.s.



AFFIDAVIT OF COMPLAINT

      The UNDERSIGNED, 	, accuses 	, of 	, committed as follows, to wit :

That on or about 	 , at about 	 in the
	, 		, Philippines, the said accused did then and there willfully, unlawfully, feloniously, and by means of 	, committed 		, upon the undersigned directly by overt acts to wit :(state the details how the crime was committed).

      The	undersigned	executed	this	affidavit	to	attest	the	truthfulness of the foregoing facts and to support the filing of Criminal Cases against
	 for violations of 	 .

	, this 	 day of 	, 	.


Offended Party


SUBSCRIBED AND SWORN to before me this 	 day of 	 at
	. I HEREBY CERTIFY that I have personally examined the herein offended party and I am satisfied that they voluntarily executed and understood their given affidavit.

Judge
WITNESSES :










Sample of Affidavit of Witness
Republic of the Philippines )

ANNEX "TT"

	,	
X	x

)s.s.

AFFIDAVIT OF WITNESS
I,		,	age,	civil	status,	resident	of
	, after having sworn in accordance with law, do hereby depose and state THAT :
01. I was present and personally saw that accused 	

committed	the	crime	of		
	 ;

against	the	victim


02. (State other circumstances and the relation either to the victim or
accused or both);

03. (State the details of the acts committed by the accused against the victim.

04. (State the acts done by the witness and the reason thereof);
      I	executed	this	affidavit	to	attest	the	truthfulness	of	the foregoing facts and to support the filing of the Criminal Cases against
	 for violations of 	.

AFFIANTS SAYETH NAUGHT.

IN  WITNESS  WHEREOF,	I  hereunto  affixed  my  signature
this			day	of			at		,
	 .	





Affiant




SUBSCRIBED AND SWORN to before me this 	 day of
	 at 	. I HEREBY CERTIFY that I have personally examined the herein affiants and I am satisfied that they voluntarily executed and understood their given affidavit.


Notary Public




ANNEX "UU"





ANNEX "VV"
Crisis Communication Action Team (CCAT) Organizational Structure





BIBLIOGRAPHY


AFP-PNP. (2020). Joint Letter Directive Nr. 3 Revised Version: Guidelines in Evaluating the effectiveness of Internal Security Operations in Support to the National Thrust to End the Local Communist Armed Conflict. Quezon City.

An Act Defining Certain Rights of Person Arrested, Detained or Under Custodial Investigation as Well as The Duties of The Arresting, Detaining and Investigating Officers, and Providing Penalties for Violations Thereof, Rep. Act 7438 (1992). Metro Manila.

An Act Ensuring the Free Exercise by the People of their Right Peaceably to Assemble and Petition the Government for Other Purposes, BP Blg. 880 (1985).

An Act Establishing a Comprehensive Juvenile Justice and Welfare System, Creating the Juvenile Justice and Welfare Council Under the Department of Justice, Appropriating Funds Therefor and for Other Purposes, Rep. Act 9344 (2006). Metro Manila.

An Act Expanding Republic Act No. 9208, Entitled "An Act to Institute Policies to Eliminate Trafficking in Persons Especially Women and Children, Establishing the Necessary Institutional Mechanisms for the Protection and Support of Trafficked Persons, Providing Penalties for its Violations and for Other Purposes", Rep. Act 10364 (2012). Metro Manila.

An Act Instituting the Comprehensive Dangerous Drugs Act of 2002, Repealing Republic Act No. 6425, Otherwise Known as the Dangerous Drugs Act of 1972, As Amended, Providing Funds Therefor, And for Other Purposes, Rep. Act 9165 (2002). Metro Manila.

An Act Penalizing Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman and Degrading Treatment or Punishment and Prescribing Penalties Therefor, Rep. Act 9745 (2009). Metro Manila.

An Act Providing for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labor and Affording Stronger Protection for the Working Child, amending for this Purpose Republic Act no. 7610, As Amended, Otherwise Known As The "Special Protection of Children Against Child Abuse, Exploitation and Discrimination Act", Rep. Act 9231 (2003). Metro Manila.

An Act Providing for the Magna Carta of Women, Rep. Act 9710 (2009). Metro Manila.




An Act Providing for the Special Protection of Children in Situations of Armed Conflict and Providing Penalties for Violations Thereof, Rep. Act 11188 (2019). Metro Manila.

An Act to Further Strengthen the Anti-Drug Campaign of The Government, amending for the Purpose Section 21 of Republic Act No. 9165, Otherwise Known as the "Comprehensive Dangerous Drugs Act of 2002", Rep. Act 10640 (2013). Metro Manila.

Department of Justice. (2013). Additional Guidelines in the Disposition of Inquest
Cases Involving Violations of P.D. 1866, as amended by R. A. 8294. Manila.

Department of Justice. (2020). Unified Manual in The Investigation and Prosecution
of Anti-Illegal Drug Cases. Metro Manila.

Office of the Court Administrator. (2013). OCA Circular No. 87-2013. Manila.

Philippine Drug Enforcement Agency & Philippine National Police (2021) Unified Coordination Guidelines in the Conduct of Anti-Illegal Drug Operations. Quezon City

Philippine National Police. (2011). Conduct of Crime Scene Investigation, Standard Operating Procedure No. ODIDM-2011-008. Quezon City.

Philippine National Police. (2011). Criminal Investigation Manual. Quezon City. Philippine National Police. (2012). PCR Master Plan. Quezon City.
Philippine National Police. (2013). Establishment of Police Defensive Roadblock. Quezon City.

Philippine National Police. (2013). Intensified Anti-Kidnapping Operations in Sulu, CMC 62-2013. Quezon City: Philippine National Police.

Philippine National Police. (2014). Memorandum re Proposed Policies, Guidelines and Procedures Governing the Enhancement of the PNP Presence in Social Networking Sites. Quezon City.

Philippine National Police. (2016). Manual in Handling Cases of Children at Risk and Children in Conflict with the Law. Quezon City.

Philippine National Police. (2017). Revised Standard Operating Procedure: Trafficking in Persons Investigation Manual. Quezon City.




Philippine National Police. (2018). PNP People's Freedom of Information Manual. Quezon City.

Philippine National Police. (2019). PNP MC No. 2019-046 re Police Community Affairs and Development Master Plan "TAGATAGUYOD". Quezon City.

Philippine National Police. (2019). PNP MC No. 2020-034 re Guidelines and Procedures on Social Media Content, Post and Engagement Utilizing Official Social Media Accounts and Individual Accounts of PNP Personnel. Quezon City.

Philippine National Police. (2020). Women And Children Protection Desk Investigator's Manual. Quezon City.

Philippine National Police. (2020). Critical Incident Management Operational Procedures (CIMOP). Quezon City.

Philippine National Police. (2020). Memo Directive re Guidelines on the Use of Gender-Fair Language in the PNP. Quezon City.

Philippine National Police. (2021). Memorandum re PNP Crisis Communication Action Team. Quezon City.

Philippine National Police. (2021). Strengthening PNP's Role in the Prevention and Countering of Violent Extremism (P/CVE) through the Salaam Police Center, CMC 08-2021. Quezon City.

Supreme Court. (2021). A.M. No. 21-06-08-SC Rules on the Use of Body-Worn Cameras in the Execution of Warrants. Manila.

The Constitution of the Republic of the Philippines. (1987). The Revised Rules of Criminal Procedure. (2000).
United Nations Human Rights. (1979). Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement
Officials. Adopted by General Assembly (art 2 to 3).

United Nations. Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations (1961). Vienna, Austria.




TECHNICAL WORKING GROUP


PBGEN RONNIE FRANCIS M CARIAGA	 CHAIRMAN PBGEN JOHN GUYGUYON	VICE-CHAIRMAN

MEMBERS

PBGEN ORLANDO O YEBRA JR PCOL REYNALDO H PAWID PCOL BERNIE H ORIG
PCOL DAVID M VINLUAN PCOL DONATO R BAIT PCOL EMMA M LIBUNAO PCOL JEFFREY Z DECENA PCOL JERICH T ROYALES PCOL JOAQUIN R ALVA PCOL LAMBERT A SUERTE PCOL LIMUEL E OBON PCOL LOPE MA U LIM
PCOL LUIS MARIA T PASCUAL PCOL ALAN B MANIBOG PCOL OLIVER S TANSECO PCOL OWEN S ANDARINO PCOL ROMAN C ARUGAY PCOL RONALD G HIPOLITO PCOL ARMANDO F MUENA
PCOL JOHN RODERICK A MORALES PLTCOL AL F PAGLINAWAN
PLTCOL MARK JOY R BATUYONG PLTCOL DARWIN CLARK B PAZ PLTCOL ROBERT A DELOS REYES PLTCOL JACINTO R MALINAO JR PLTCOL JACKSON G SEGUIN




PLTCOL JOAN L MONTERO PLTCOL JOEL D CASUPANAN PLTCOL JOHNNY I CAPALOS PLTCOL KRISTOFFER P BAUTISTA
PLTCOL MARK JANIS C BALLESTEROS PLTCOL PATRICK P RAMILLANO PLTCOL RAUL C BOLIDO
PLTCOL REYNALDO T HELAGA PLTCOL REYNALDO T CALAOA PLTCOL ROMULO Z FLORES II PLTCOL RUEL A FERRER PLTCOL JOEL C TUTTUH
PLTCOL EULOGIO LOVELLO R FABRO PLTCOL GENIE L BALUBAL PLTCOL FRANCIS T BALAIS PLTCOL LOURDEZ G JUAN PMAJ ARLENE B ACAPEN
PMAJ CHRISTOPHER BRIAN V CRUZADA PMAJ HOWELL JOSEPH O GREAS PMAJ JULIUS L JACOB
PMAJ LIBRADO C MANARANG JR PMAJ LIGAYA B GARABILES PMAJ LORENZO S DALANG III PMAJ CAMILO T MALING JR PMAJ JOEL L DE VILLENA
PMAJ WILBERT C PADNGARAN JR PMAJ PERLITO R TUAYON PMAJ REYDIAN B CORALES PMAJ ANDRES Q TELLES JR
PMAJ WILSON I CARO PLT GLENN S UMALI
PLT GIBSON JOHN A SOSA




SECRETARIAT

PMAJ KARISSMA G STA JUANA	HEAD SECRETARIAT AND WRITER

MEMBERS/TECHNICAL STAFF

PMAJ MA GRACIA R JULIAN
PLT MARIA GERLYINES C BANDULA
PEMS Joey D San Esteban PCMS Francis Voltaire R Ricafort PSSg Nicanor B Guittu Jr
PSSg Mark Alvin G Sarmiento PCpl Leovic V Llamera
PCpl Salve Grace B Ticman PCpl Betty Rose T Vega
PCpl Janelle Roxanne C Hular Pat Reynald Louie S Sulit Pat Stephen Paul B Diaz
Pat Eric B Sarmiento Pat Percy W Bag-ayan Pat Raffy Jane A Suaya NUP Jean P Palpal-latoc
NUP Ma Josefina Mabel R Bueno
NUP Maria Arvica C Murillo NUP Zheena Luz M Pastorfide NUP Eduard E Tubojan
NUP Arianne Aile Q Vital

ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPORT AND STAFF

PLTCOL DEXTER C VERSOLA PLTCOL ANTHONY S LANDIG PLTCOL RONNIE O ALBINO
PEMS Mervin M Pili PEMS Allan Jay A Parazo NUP Luzviminda G Cruzat NUP Lyneth T Pomida


Republic of the Philippines NATIONAL POLICE COMMISSION
NATIONAL HEADQUARTERS, PHILIPPINE NATIONAL POLICE OFFICE OF THE CHIEF, PNP
Camp BGen Rafael T Crame, Quezon City

MEMORANDUM

TO	: All Concerned

FROM	: CPNP

SUBJECT: Promulgation on Philippine National Police Operational Procedures (POP) Manual

DATE	: September 15, 2021


     1. This pertains to the Philippine National Police Operational Procedures (POP) Manual spearheaded by the Directorate for Operations (DO) as the manual proponent. The manual was initiated to ensure adherence to all existing laws.

     2. The Philippine National Police Operational Procedures (POP) Manual contains information and guidelines in performing police operations. It also discusses policies and guidelines on how the police officers should carry out their tasks concerning police operations. As it is, the security classification of the said manual is "Restricted."

     3. In view thereof, all PNP personnel concerned are hereby enjoined to read and clearly understand the contents and provisions of the manual and use it as a guide in conducting their respective affairs with their superiors, peers, subordinates, and public-in-contact as its applicability encompasses day-to-day operations and a violation of it may affect the integrity of the institution as the premier law enforcement agency of the country.

4. This manual is promulgated for guidance and information of all PNP
personnel and is effective immediately.



GUILLERMO LORENZO T ELEAZAR
Police General





Republic of the Philippines National Police Commission
NATIONAL HEADQUARTERS, PHILIPPINE NATIONAL POLICE BOARD FOR DOCTRINE DEVELOPMENT
Camp BGen Rafael T Crame, Quezon City

	BDD RESOLUTION No. 2021-12	


RE:		Endorsing the Approval and Adoption of the Philippine National Police Operational Procedures (POP) Manual

       WHEREAS, PNPMC No. 2014-020 (Revised Guidelines and Procedures in the Development of PNP Doctrines and Manuals) created and organized the Board for Doctrine Development (BDD), composed of TDHRDD as Chair, Deputy Directors of DPRM and DO as the respective Vice-Chair for BDD Sub-Boards for Administration and Operations, and the Deputy Directors of concerned Directorial Staff as members, to deliberate and evaluate the content, format and/or adaptability of a proposed doctrine/manual;

WHEREAS, the Directorate for Operations (DO) proposed the revision of the 2013
POP Manual before the BDD Secretariat last August 12, 2020 for initial assessment;

       WHEREAS, after assessment, the BDD submitted the proposed manual to the BDD Sub-Board on Operations composed of Deputy Directors of DO, DI, DIDM, DPCR, DPL, LS, Chief, HRAO, and CS, CPSM;

       WHEREAS, the BDD Sub-Board on Operations convened on August 31, September 2 and September 6, 2021, to evaluate the merit and contents of the proposed revision, and to subsequently deliberate the adaptability and relevance of the said manual in facilitating police operations;

       WHEREAS, on September 3, 2021, the BDD finds the overall contents of the manual cogent, relevant, and applicable, and thereby rules the approval and adaption of the manual for use of PNP personnel;

NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED AS IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED that the
Philippine National Police Operational Procedures (POP) Manual be endorsed for the approval of the Chief, PNP, prior to its adoption and subsequent promulgation.

       SIGNED this 6th day of September 2021 at the National Headquarters, Philippine National Police, Camp BGen Rafael T Crame, Quezon City.




Chair:


PMGEN BARTOLOME R BUSTAMANTE
The Director for Human Resource and Doctrine Development



Vice Chair:


PBGEN FRANCO P SIMBORIO
Deputy Director, DO Members:

PBGEN ADOLFO B SAMALA	PBGEN HARRIS R FAMA
Deputy Director, DI	Deputy Director, DPCR


PBGEN ULYSSES G CRUZ	PBGEN REMUS ZACHARIAS P CANIESO
Deputy Director, DIDM	Deputy Director, DPL


PBGEN VINCENT S CALANOGA	PCOL ARTHUR R LLAMAS
Chief, HRAO	Deputy Director, LS


PCOL CARLITO M GACES
Chief of Staff, CPSM

BDD Secretariat:


PCOL JOB RUSSEL M BALAQUIT	PLTCOL JESSICA B PAGLALUNAN
Head Secretariat	Asst. Head Secretariat











































      Published by: Directorate for Operations Philippine National Police
2021


























































































































































































































































